
A Farewell to Alms


THE PRINCETON ECONOWIC HISTORY
OF THE WESTERN WORLD 

Joel Mokyr, Editor

Growth in a Traditional Society: The French Countryside, 1ę/o–181/,

by Philip T. Hoffman

The Vanishing Irish: Households, Migration, and the Rural Economy in Ireland,

18/o–191ę, by Timothy W. Guinnane

Black ’ęy and Beyond: The Great Irish Famine in History, Economy, and Memory,

by Cormac Ó Gráda

The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World Economy,

by Kenneth Pomeranz

The Big Problem of Small Change, by Thomas J. Sargent and François R. Velde

Farm to Factory: A Reinterpretation of the Soviet Industrial Revolution,

by Robert C. Allen

Quarter Notes and Bank Notes: The Economics of Music Composition in the
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries, by F. M. Scherer

The Strictures of Inheritance: The Dutch Economy in the Nineteenth Century,

by Jan Luiten van Zanden and Arthur van Riel

Understanding the Process of Economic Change, by Douglass C. North

Feeding the World: An Economic History of World Agriculture, 18oo–looo,

by Giovanni Federico

Cultures Merging: A Historical and Economic Critique of Culture, by Eric L. Jones

The European Economy since 19ę/: Coordinated Capitalism and Beyond,

by Barry Eichengreen

War, Wine, and Taxes: The Political Economy of Anglo-French Trade, 1689–19oo,

by John V. C. Nye

A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World, by Gregory Clark


A Farewell to Alms

a BRIEF ECONOMIC

HISTORY OF THE wORLD

Gregory Clark

PRINCET ON UNIV ERSIT Y PR ESS 

Princeton and Oxford


Copyright © 2007 by Princeton University Press

Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540

In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 3 Market Place, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1SY
All Rights Reserved

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Clark, Gregory, 1957–

A farewell to alms : a brief economic history of the world / Gregory Clark.

p. cm. — (The Princeton economic history of the Western world)
Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 978-0-691-12135-2 (cloth : alk. paper)

1. Economic history. I. Title.
HC21.C63  2007

330.9—dc22                     2007015166

British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available

This book has been composed in Adobe Garamond by Princeton Editorial Associates, Inc.,
Scottsdale, Arizona

Printed on acid-free paper. ∞



press.princeton.edu

Printed in the United States of America

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


To Mary, Maximilian, Madeline, and Innis



Contents

Preface ix
Acknowledgments xi

1 Introduction: The Sixteen-Page Economic History of the World 

art I  The Malthusian Trap: Economic Life to 8

2 The Logic of the Malthusian Economy 9

3 Living Standards 4

4 Fertility 7

5 Life Expectancy 9

6 Malthus and Darwin: Survival of the Richest 2

7 Technological Advance 33

8 Institutions and Growth 45

9 The Emergence of Modern Man 66

art II  The Industrial Revolution

10 Modern Growth: The Wealth of Nations 93

11 The Puzzle of the Industrial Revolution 28

12 The Industrial Revolution in England 23

13 Why England? Why Not China, India, or Japan? 259

14 Social Consequences 272


art III  The Great Divergence

15 World Growth since 1800 33

16 The Proximate Sources of Divergence 328

17 Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed? 352

18 Conclusion: Strange New World 37

Technical Appendix 39

References 383

Index 9

Figure Credits 9

viii   c ott s


Preface

This book takes a bold approach to history. It discerns, within a welter of
often sketchy and sometimes conflicting empirical evidence, simple structures
that describe mankind’s long history—structures that can accommodate the
startling facts about human history and the present world detailed in these
pages. It is an unabashed attempt at big history, in the tradition of The Wealth
of Nations, Das Kapital, The Rise of the Western World, and most recently Guns,
Germs, and Steel. All these books, like this one, ask: How did we get here?
Why did it take so long? Why are some rich and some poor? Where are we
headed?

Intellectual curiosity alone makes these compelling questions. But while
the book is focused on history, it also speaks to modern economic policy. For
the text details how economists, and the institutions they inhabit, such as
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, have adopted a false
picture of preindustrial societies, and of the eventual causes of modern
growth. These fanciful notions underlie current policies to cure the ills of
the poor countries of the world, such as those represented by the Washington
Consensus.

Though the book is about economics, we shall see that in the long run
economic institutions, psychology, culture, politics, and sociology are deeply
interwoven. Our very nature—our desires, our aspirations, our interactions—
was shaped by past economic institutions, and it now in turn shapes modern
economic systems. This book thus also has much to offer readers interested
in anthropology and political, social, and even cultural history.

ix


Fortunately for the reader, a simple set of ideas can carry us a long way
in explaining the evolution of the world economy through the millennia.
No formal economics training is necessary to understand any of what follows.
Thus—though the issues grappled with here are ones that remain on the
agendas   of the most technically oriented economists—they are issues that
readers innocent of the elaborate theoretical apparatus can fully appreciate.

Doubtless some of the arguments developed here will prove over-
simplified, or merely false. They are certainly controversial, even among my
colleagues in economic history. But far better such error than the usual dreary
academic sins, which now seem to define so much writing in the humanities,
of willful obfuscation and jargon-laden vacuity. As Darwin himself noted,
“false views, if supported by some evidence, do little harm, for every one takes
a salutary pleasure in proving their falseness: and when this is done, one path
towards error is closed and the road to truth is often at the same time
opened.”1 Thus my hope is that, even if the book is wrong in parts, it will be
clearly and productively wrong, leading us toward the light.

Underlying the book is a wealth of data I have assembled on the history
of the English economy between 1200 and 1870. To make the book easier on
the reader, figures and tables that rely on this data set are not individually ref-
erenced. Where a source is not indicated for a figure or a table, or for a por-
tion  of a figure or a table, the underlying data and its sources will be found
in Clark (2007b).

This book is the product of twenty years of labor in a particularly obscure
corner of the academic vineyard: quantitative economic history. I am fortunate
that the economics and history professions both so lightly regard these vines
that a single scholar can claim whole centuries as his personal garden, and
tend it reflectively and unmolested. But I hope that the book will also inter-
est professional economists and historians, and remind them that a constant
diet of Gallo can dull the palate.

1. Darwin, 1998, 629.

x    R a c 


Acknowledgments

In writing this book I have accumulated a list of debts that is Trumpian in
scale. The first is to those who commented on the manuscript or related papers,
saving me from countless embarrassments and suggesting important revisions:
Cliff Bekar, Steven Broadberry, Bruce Charlton, Anthony Clark, Alexander
Field, James Fulford, Regina Grafe, Eric Jones, Oscar Jorda, Madeline Mc-
Comb, Mary McComb, Tom Mayer, Joel Mokyr, Jim Oeppen, Cormac Ó
Gráda, Kevin O’Rourke, James Robinson, Kevin Salyer, James Simpson, Jef-
frey Williamson, and Susan Wolcott. I owe a special debt to my editors—Joel
Mokyr, the series editor for the Princeton Economic History of the Western
World, and Peter Dougherty of Princeton University Press—for their patience
and wise counsel in the face of significant provocation. Peter Strupp of Prince-
ton Editorial Associates copyedited the manuscript with astonishing attention
to both detail and content.

My second debt is to my colleagues at the University of California, Davis.
The economics department here is an astonishingly lively and collegial place.
Alan Olmstead made Davis a center for economic history. His leadership of the
All-UC Group in Economic History helped make California the world center
of economic history. Peter Lindert has ageless enthusiasm, energy, and generos-
ity. Alan Taylor threatens to transform this neglected corner of the vineyard
into a grand cru. My colleagues in economics—especially Paul Bergin, Colin
Cameron, Kevin Hoover, Hilary Hoynes, Oscar Jorda, Chris Knittel, Doug
Miller, Marianne Page, Giovanni Peri, Kadee Russ, Kevin Salyer, Ann Stevens,
and Deborah Swenson—made every day fun, stimulating, and entertaining.

xi


I am grateful to Gillian Hamilton, David Jacks, and Susan Wolcott, past
co-authors whose work is incorporated in this book.

Several research assistants helped collect or code the data underlying much
of this work: David Brown, Robert Eyler, Melanie Guldi, Peter Hohn, Eric
Jamelske, David Nystrom, and Shahar Sansani. Shahar was diligent beyond
duty  in finding the correct citations for the many sources.

My fifth debt is to the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin (Institute for Ad-
vanced Study) for a fellowship in 2005–06 that gave me the time and impe-
tus  to bring this project to completion. The library staff there, particularly
Marianne Buck, were wonderfully helpful in tracking down sources and
potential illustrations.

Three grants from the National Science Foundation (SES 02-41376, SES
00-95616, and SES 91-22191) over the past fifteen years funded much of the
data collection underlying the book.

Another more general obligation of long standing is to the teachers of
Holy Cross High School, Hamilton, Scotland. It would be hard to imagine a
more ramshackle hodgepodge of buildings, and the discipline was at times
medieval. But the teachers were dedicated, knowledgeable, and generous with
their time for no reward beyond the satisfaction of a job well done.

My final debt is to my wife, Mary McComb. While struggling with the
manuscript I largely abandoned any domestic responsibilities in Berlin from
August 2005 to July 2006, and that neglect continued in Davis for the rest of
2006. Mary, while working full time at her own profession, took over as cook,
councilor, tour guide, German translator, and domestic enforcer. In addition
she read and commented on the entire manuscript. This debt, at least, I hope
I can repay.

xii   a cowl G t s


  Introduction: The Sixteen-Page
Economic History of the World

He may therefore be justly numbered among the benefactors of mankind, who
contracts the great rules of life into short sentences, that may be easily impressed
on  the memory, and taught by frequent recollection to recur habitually to the
mind.       —Samuel Johnson, Rambler No. 175 (November 19, 1751)

The basic outline of world economic history is surprisingly simple. Indeed it
can be summarized in one diagram: figure 1.1. Before 1800 income per person

—the food, clothing, heat, light, and housing available per head—varied across
societies and epochs. But there was no upward trend. A simple but powerful
mechanism explained in this book, the Malthusian Trap, ensured that short-
term  gains in income through technological advances were inevitably lost
through population growth.

Thus the average person in the world of 1800 was no better off than the
average person of 100,000 BC. Indeed in 1800 the bulk of the world’s popu-
lation was poorer than their remote ancestors. The lucky denizens of wealthy
societies such as eighteenth-century England or the Netherlands managed a
material lifestyle equivalent to that of the Stone Age. But the vast swath of
humanity in East and South Asia, particularly in China and Japan, eked out
a  living under conditions probably significantly poorer than those of cavemen.
The quality of life also failed to improve on any other observable dimen-
sion. Life expectancy was no higher in 1800 than for hunter-gatherers: thirty
to thirty-five years. Stature, a measure both of the quality of diet and of chil-
dren’s exposure to disease, was higher in the Stone Age than in 1800. And
while foragers satisfy their material wants with small amounts of work, the
modest comforts of the English in 1800 were purchased only through a life of
unrelenting drudgery. Nor did the variety of material consumption improve.
The average forager had a diet, and a work life, much more varied than the




12

10

Great Divergence

8

6

4                            Industrial Revolution

2        Malthusian Trap


0

BC 1000

-500      0

500

1000

1500

AD 2000

Figure . World economic history in one picture. Incomes rose sharply in many countries
after 1800 but declined in others.

typical English worker of 1800, even though the English table by then included
such exotics as tea, pepper, and sugar.

And hunter-gatherer societies are egalitarian. Material consumption varies
little across the members. In contrast, inequality was pervasive in the agrarian
economies that dominated the world in 1800. The riches of a few dwarfed the
pinched allocations of the masses. Jane Austen may have written about re-
fined conversations over tea served in china cups. But for the majority of the
English as late as 1813 conditions were no better than for their naked ancestors
of  the African savannah. The Darcys were few, the poor plentiful.

So, even according to the broadest measures of material life, average
welfare, if anything, declined from the Stone Age to 1800. The poor of 1800,
those who lived by their unskilled labor alone, would have been better off if
transferred to a hunter-gatherer band.

The Industrial Revolution, a mere two hundred years ago, changed for-
ever the possibilities for material consumption. Incomes per person began to
undergo sustained growth in a favored group of countries. The richest mod-
ern economies are now ten to twenty times wealthier than the 1800 average.
Moreover the biggest beneficiary of the Industrial Revolution has so far been

2  chat R 


the unskilled. There have been benefits aplenty for the typically wealthy own-
ers of land or capital, and for the educated. But industrialized economies
saved their best gifts for the poorest.

Prosperity, however, has not come to all societies. Material consumption
in some countries, mainly in sub-Saharan Africa, is now well below the pre-
industrial norm. Countries such as Malawi or Tanzania would be better off in
material terms had they never had contact with the industrialized world and
instead continued in their preindustrial state. Modern medicine, airplanes,
gasoline, computers—the whole technological cornucopia of the past two
hundred years—have succeeded there in producing among the lowest mate-
rial living standards ever experienced. These African societies have remained
trapped in the Malthusian era, where technological advances merely produce
more people and living standards are driven down to subsistence. But modern
medicine has reduced the material minimum required for subsistence to a level
far below that of the Stone Age. Just as the Industrial Revolution reduced in-
come inequalities within societies, it has increased them between societies, in
a process recently labeled the Great Divergence.1 The gap in incomes between
countries is of the order of 50:1. There walk the earth now both the richest
people who ever lived and the poorest.

Thus world economic history poses three interconnected problems: Why
did the Malthusian Trap persist for so long? Why did the initial escape from that
trap in the Industrial Revolution occur on one tiny island, England, in 1800?
Why was there the consequent Great Divergence? This book proposes an-
swers to all three of these puzzles—answers that point up the connections
among them. The explanation for both the timing and the nature of the In-
dustrial Revolution, and at least in part for the Great Divergence, lies in pro-
cesses that began thousands of years ago, deep in the Malthusian era. The dead
hand of the past still exerts a powerful grip on the economies of the present.
The focus on material conditions in this history will strike some as too
narrow, too incidental to vast social changes over the millennia. Surely our ma-
terial riches reflect but a tiny fraction of what makes industrialized societies

modern?

On the contrary, there is ample evidence that wealth—and wealth alone—
is the crucial determinant of lifestyles, both within and between societies.
Income growth changes consumption and lifestyles in highly predictable

1. Pomeranz, 2000.

t R O  UCT o   3


ways. The recent demise first of the American farmer and then of the manu-
facturing worker were already preordained when income began its upward
march during the Industrial Revolution. Had we been more clear-sighted, we
could have foreseen in 1800 our world of walk-in closets, his-and-her bath-
rooms, caramel macchiatos, balsamic reductions, boutique wines, liberal arts
colleges, personal trainers, and $50 entrees.

There are surely many surprises ahead for mankind in the centuries to
come, but for the most part the economic future is not an alien and exotic
land. We already see how the rich live, and their current lifestyle predicts
powerfully how we will all eventually live if economic growth continues.2
Anyone who has visited the British Museum or the Sistine Chapel, for ex-
ample, has had a foretaste of the relentless tide of tourism set to be unleashed
on the world by another few decades of strong economic growth.3 Even the
high-income demand for unique and individualized travel and dining expe-
riences is now catered to on an industrial scale.

Just as we can see the future through the lives of the rich, so the small
wealthy elite of the preindustrial world led lives that prefigured our own. The
delight of the modern American suburbanite in his or her first SUV echoes
precisely that of Samuel Pepys, the wealthy London civil servant, on acquir-
ing  his first coach in 1668.4 A walk through the reconstructed villas of Pom-
peii and Herculaneum, frozen in time on the day of the eruption of Vesuvius
in AD 79, reveals homes that suburban Americans would happily move into:
“Charming home with high ceilings, central courtyard, great room, finely de-
tailed mosaics, and garden water feature—unobstructed Vesuvian views.”

Thus I make no apologies for focusing on income. Over the long run in-
come is more powerful than any ideology or religion in shaping lives. No
God has commanded worshippers to their pious duties more forcefully than
income as it subtly directs the fabric of our lives.

The Malthusian Trap: Economic Life to 1800

The first third of the book is devoted to a simple model of the economic logic
of all societies before 1800, and to showing how this accords with historical

2. Thus when Bill and Melinda Gates were expecting a third child in 2002 they expanded
their house, in light of their greater space needs, to its current 50,000 square feet.

3. The major export of New Zealand, for example, is now tourism services.

4. Pepys, 2000, November 28, 1668.

4  chat R 


evidence. This model requires only three basic assumptions, can be explained
graphically, and explains why technological advance improved material living
conditions only after 1800.

The crucial factor was the rate of technological advance. As long as tech-
nology improved slowly, material conditions could not permanently improve,
even while there was cumulatively significant gain in the technologies. The
rate of technological advance in Malthusian economies can be inferred from
population growth. The typical rate of technological advance before 1800 was
well below 0.05 percent per year, about a thirtieth of the modern rate.

In this model the economy of humans in the years before 1800 turns
out to be just the natural economy of all animal species, with the same kinds
of factors determining the living conditions of animals and humans. It is
called the Malthusian Trap because the vital insight underlying the model
was that of the Reverend Thomas Robert Malthus, who in 1798 in An Essay on
the Principle of Population took the initial steps toward understanding the
logic of this economy.

In the Malthusian economy before 1800 economic policy was turned on
its head: vice now was virtue then, and virtue vice. Those scourges of failed
modern states—war, violence, disorder, harvest failures, collapsed public
infrastructures, bad sanitation—were the friends of mankind before 1800.
They  reduced population pressures and increased material living standards.
In contrast policies beloved of the World Bank and the United Nations
today—peace, stability, order, public health, transfers to the poor—were the
enemies   of prosperity. They generated the population growth that impover-
ished societies.

At first sight the claim of no material advance before 1800 seems absurd.
Figure 1.2 shows Nukak hunter-gatherers of the modern Amazonian rain for-
est, naked, with a simplicity of possessions. Figure 1.3 in contrast shows an
upper-class English family, the Braddylls, painted in all their finery by Sir
Joshua Reynolds in 1789. How is it possible to claim that material living con-
ditions were on average the same across all these societies?

But the logic of the Malthusian model matches the empirical evidence for
the preindustrial world. While even long before the Industrial Revolution small
elites had an opulent lifestyle, the average person in 1800 was no better off than
his or her ancestors of the Paleolithic or Neolithic.

The Malthusian logic developed in this book also reveals the crucial im-
portance of fertility control to material conditions before 1800. All preindustrial

t R O  UCT o   5


Figure .2 The Nukak, a surviving hunter-gatherer society in the Colombian rain forest.

societies for which we have sufficient records to reveal fertility levels experi-
enced some limitation on fertility, though the mechanisms varied widely.
Most societies before 1800 consequently lived well above the bare subsistence
limit. That is why there has been plenty of room for African living standards
to fall in the years since the Industrial Revolution.

Mortality conditions also mattered, and here Europeans were lucky to be
a filthy people who squatted happily above their own feces, stored in base-
ment cesspits, in cities such as London. Poor hygiene, combined with high
urbanization rates with their attendant health issues, meant incomes had to
be   high to maintain the population in eighteenth-century England and the
Netherlands. The Japanese, with a more highly developed sense of cleanliness,
could maintain the level of population at miserable levels of material com-
forts, and they were accordingly condemned to subsist on a much more limited
income.

Since the economic laws governing human society were those that govern
all animal societies, mankind was subject to natural selection throughout the
Malthusian era, even after the arrival of settled agrarian societies with the Neo-
lithic Revolution of 8000 BC, which transformed hunters into settled agri-
culturalists. The Darwinian struggle that shaped human nature did not end

6  chat R 


Figure .3 The Braddyll Family, Sir Joshua Reynolds,
1789. Wilson Gale-Braddyll was a Member of Parliament
and Groom to the Bedchamber of the Prince of Wales.

with the Neolithic Revolution but continued right up until the Industrial
Revolution.

For England we will see compelling evidence of differential survival of types
in the years 1250–1800. In particular, economic success translated powerfully
into reproductive success. The richest men had twice as many surviving chil-
dren at death as the poorest. The poorest individuals in Malthusian England
had so few surviving children that their families were dying out. Preindustrial
England was thus a world of constant downward mobility. Given the static na-
ture  of the Malthusian economy, the superabundant children of the rich had to,
on average, move down the social hierarchy in order to find work. Craftsmen’s
sons became laborers, merchants’ sons petty traders, large landowners’ sons

t R O  UCT o   7


smallholders. The attributes that would ensure later economic dynamism—
patience, hard work, ingenuity, innovativeness, education—were thus spread-
ing biologically throughout the population.

Just as people were shaping economies, the economy of the preindustrial
era was shaping people, at least culturally and perhaps also genetically.5 The
Neolithic Revolution created agrarian societies that were just as capital inten-
sive  as the modern world. At least in England, the emergence of such an in-
stitutionally stable, capital-intensive economic system created a society that
rewarded middle-class values with reproductive success, generation after gen-
eration. This selection process was accompanied by changes in the character-
istics of the preindustrial economy, due largely to the population’s adoption
of more middle-class preferences. Interest rates fell, murder rates declined, work
hours increased, the taste for violence declined, and numeracy and literacy
spread even to the lower reaches of society.

The Industrial Revolution

The stasis of the preindustrial world, which occupied most of the history of
mankind, was shattered by two seemingly unprecedented events in European
society in the years 1760–1900. The first was the Industrial Revolution, the
appearance for the first time of rapid economic growth fueled by increasing
production efficiency made possible by advances in knowledge. The second
was the demographic transition, a decline in fertility which started with the
upper classes and gradually encompassed all of society. The demographic
transition allowed the efficiency advance of the Industrial Revolution to
translate not into an endless supply of impoverished people but into the as-
tonishing rise of income per person that we have seen since 1800. The second
third of the book examines these changes.

The Industrial Revolution and the associated demographic transition
constitute the great questions of economic history. Why was technological
advance so slow in all preindustrial societies? Why did the rate of advance

5. I first became interested in this idea in 1989. Clark and McGinley, 1989, argued
through a simulation exercise that the logic of the Malthusian era implied that people evolved
after the Neolithic Revolution toward greater patience and lower fertility. At the time these
ideas seemed to conflict with the historical record and biological possibilities. My interest was
reignited by a theoretical paper, making the same argument, by Oded Galor and Omar Moav;
Galor and Moav, 2002.

8  chat R 


increase so greatly after 1800? Why was one by-product of this technological
advance a decline in fertility? And, finally, why have all societies not been able
to share in the ample fruits of the Industrial Revolution?

There are only three established approaches to these puzzles. The first lo-
cates the Industrial Revolution in events outside the economic system, such
as changes in political institutions, in particular the introduction of modern
democracies. The second argues that preindustrial society was caught in a
stable,  but stagnant, economic equilibrium. Some shock set forces in motion
that moved society to a new, dynamic equilibrium. The last approach argues
that the Industrial Revolution was the product of a gradual evolution of so-
cial conditions in the Malthusian era: growth was endogenous. According to
the first two theories the Industrial Revolution might never have occurred, or
could have been delayed thousands of years. Only the third approach suggests
that there was any inevitability to it.

The classic description of the Industrial Revolution has suggested that it
was an abrupt transition between economic regimes, as portrayed in figure 1.1,
with a change within fifty years from preindustrial productivity growth rates
to modern rates. If this is correct then only theories that emphasize an exter-
nal shock or a switch between equilibria could possibly explain the Industrial
Revolution.

The classic description has also suggested that significant technological
advances across disparate sectors of the economy contributed to growth dur-
ing  the Industrial Revolution, again pointing toward some economywide
institutional change or equilibrium shift. This implies that we should be able
to   find the preconditions for an Industrial Revolution by looking at changes
in institutional and economic conditions in England in the years just before
1800. And waves of economists and economic historians have thrown them-
selves at the problem with just such an explanation in mind—with spectacu-
lar lack of success.

The conventional picture of the Industrial Revolution as a sudden fissure
in economic life is not sustainable. There is good evidence that the produc-
tivity growth rate did not experience a clean upward break in England, but
instead fluctuated irregularly over time all the way back to 1200. Arguments
can be made for 1600, for 1800, or even for 1860 as the true break between the
Malthusian and modern economies.

When we try to connect advances in efficiency to the underlying rate
of accumulation of knowledge in England, the link turns out to depend on

t R O  UCT o   9


many accidental factors of demand, trade, and resources. In crucial ways the
classic Industrial Revolution in England in 1760–1860 was a blip, an accident,
superimposed on a longer-running upward sweep in the rate of knowledge
accumulation that had its origins in the Middle Ages or even earlier.

Thus, though an Industrial Revolution of some kind certainly occurred
between 1200 and 1860 in Europe, though mankind crossed a clear divide, a
materialist’s Jordan at the gates of the Promised Land, there is still plenty of
room  for debate about its precise time and place, and hence debate about the
conditions which led to it. An evolutionary account of gradual changes is a
much more plausible explanation than has previously been appreciated.

Despite the dominant role that institutions and institutional analysis
have played in economics and economic history since the time of Adam
Smith, institutions play at best a minor direct role in the story of the Indus-
trial Revolution told here, and in the account of economic performance since
then. By 1200 societies such as England already had all the institutional pre-
requisites for economic growth emphasized today by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. These were indeed societies more highly in-
centivized than modern high-income economies: medieval citizens had more to
gain from work and investment than their modern counterparts. Approached
from the Smithian perspective, the puzzle is not why medieval England had
no growth, but why today’s northern European countries, with their high tax
rates and heavy social spending, do not suffer economic collapse. The insti-
tutions necessary for growth existed long before growth itself began.

These institutions did create the conditions for growth, but only slowly
and indirectly over centuries and perhaps even millennia. Here the book argues
that the Neolithic Revolution, which established a settled agrarian society
with massive stocks of capital, changed the nature of the selective pressures
operating on human culture and genes. Ancient Babylonia in 2000 BC super-
ficially possessed an economy remarkably similar to that of England in 1800.
But the intervening years had profoundly shaped the culture, and maybe
even the genes, of the members of agrarian societies. It was these changes that
created the possibility of an Industrial Revolution only in AD 1800, not in
2000 BC.

Why an Industrial Revolution in England? Why not China, India, or
Japan?6 The answer hazarded here is that England’s advantages were not coal,

6. Landes, 1998; Pomeranz, 2000; Mokyr, 2005.

  chat R 


not colonies, not the Protestant Reformation, not the Enlightenment, but
the accidents of institutional stability and demography: in particular the
extraordinary stability of England back to at least 1200, the slow growth of
English population between 1300 and 1760, and the extraordinary fecundity
of  the rich and economically successful. The embedding of bourgeois values
into the culture, and perhaps even the genetics, was for these reasons the most
advanced in England.

Both China and Japan were headed in the same direction as England in
1600–1800: toward a society embodying the bourgeois values of hard work,
patience, honesty, rationality, curiosity, and learning. They too enjoyed long
periods of institutional stability and private property rights. But they were
headed there more slowly than England. David Landes is correct in observ-
ing that the Europeans had a culture more conducive to economic growth.7
China and Japan did not move as rapidly along the path as England sim-

ply because the members of their upper social strata were only modestly more
fecund than the mass of the population. Thus there was not the same cascade
of children from the educated classes down the social scale.

The samurai in Japan in the Tokugawa era (1603–1868), for example, were
ex-warriors given ample hereditary revenues through positions in the state
bureaucracy. Despite their wealth they produced on average little more than
one son per father. Their children were thus mainly accommodated within
the state bureaucracy, despite the fixed number of positions. The Qing impe-
rial lineage was the royal family of China from 1644 to 1911. They too were
wealthy through the entitlements that fell to persons of their status. They
produced more children than the average Chinese, but only modestly so.

Thus, just as accidents of social custom triumphed over hygiene, marriage,
and reproduction to make Europeans richer than Asians in the Malthusian era,
they also seem to have given Europe a greater cultural dynamic.

Whatever its cause, the Industrial Revolution has had profound social ef-
fects. As a result of two forces—the nature of technological advance and the
demographic transition—growth in capitalist economies since the Industrial
Revolution strongly promoted greater equality. Despite fears that machines
would swallow up men, the greatest beneficiaries of the Industrial Revolution
so far have been unskilled workers.

7. Landes, 1998.

t R O  UCT o   


Thus, while in preindustrial agrarian societies half or more of the na-
tional income typically went to the owners of land and capital, in modern in-
dustrialized societies their share is normally less than a quarter. Technological
advance might have been expected to dramatically reduce unskilled wages.
After all, there was a class of workers in the preindustrial economy who, of-
fering only brute strength, were quickly swept aside by machinery. By 1914
most horses had disappeared from the British economy, swept aside by steam
and internal combustion engines, even though a million had been at work in
the early nineteenth century. When their value in production fell below their
maintenance costs they were condemned to the knacker’s yard.

Similarly there was no reason why the owners of capital or land need not
have increased their shares of income. The redistribution of income toward
unskilled labor has had profound social consequences. But there is nothing
in  the happy developments so far that ensures that modern economic growth
will continue to be so benign in its effects.

The Great Divergence

The last third of the book considers why the Industrial Revolution, while
tending to equalize incomes within successful economies, has at the same
time led to a Great Divergence in national economic fortunes. How did we
end up in a world where a minority of countries has unprecedented riches
while a significant group has seen declining incomes since the Industrial Rev-
olution? This disparity is reflected in ever-widening gaps in hourly labor costs
across countries. In 2002, for example, apparel workers in India cost $0.38
per hour, compared to $9 in the United States (see figure 16.15). As the World
Trade Organization labors to gradually dissolve remaining trade barriers, does
this imply the end of all basic manufacturing activity in advanced economies?
Do we face a future dystopia for rich societies in which the wages of the un-
skilled plummet to Third World levels?

The technological, organizational, and political changes spawned by the
Industrial Revolution in the nineteenth century all seemed to predict that it
would soon transform most of the world in the way it was changing England,
the United States, and northwestern Europe. By 1900, for example, cities such
as Alexandria in Egypt, Bombay in India, and Shanghai in China were all, in
terms of transport costs, capital markets, and institutional structures, fully in-
tegrated into the British economy. Yet the growth in a favored few nations

2  chat R 


was followed haltingly in others, leading to an ever-widening income gap be-
tween societies.

This divergence in incomes is an intellectual puzzle on a par with that of
the Industrial Revolution itself. And it provides a further severe test of theo-
ries of the Industrial Revolution. Can these theories be reconciled with the in-
creasing divergence within the world economy?

A detailed examination of the cotton industry, one of the few found from
the earliest years in both rich and poor countries, shows that the anatomy of
the Great Divergence is complex and unexpected, and again hard to reconcile
with economists’ favorite explanations—bad institutions, bad equilibria, and
bad development paths. In fact workers in poorly performing economies sim-
ply supply very little actual labor input on the job. Workers in modern cot-
ton textile factories in India, for example, are actually working for as little as
fifteen minutes of each hour they are at the workplace. Thus the disparity in
hourly labor costs across the world is actually much less than it would appear
from the differences in wage rates between rich and poor countries. Labor
may cost $0.38 per hour in India, but its true cost per unit of work delivered
is much higher. The threat to the living standards of unskilled workers in the
United States from free trade with the Third World is less acute than hourly
labor costs suggest. The new technologies of the Industrial Revolution could
easily be transferred to most of the world, and the inputs for production ob-
tained cheaply across the globe. But the one thing that could not be replicated
so easily or so widely was the social environment that underpinned the coop-
eration of people in production in those countries where the technologies
were first developed.

One reason why the social environment could not be replicated seems to
be the comparatively long histories of various societies. In Guns, Germs, and
Steel Jared Diamond suggested that geography, botany, and zoology were des-
tiny.8 Europe and Asia pressed ahead economically, and remained ahead to
the present day, because of accidents of geography. They had the kinds of an-
imals that could be domesticated, and the orientation of the Eurasian land
mass allowed domesticated plants and animals to spread easily between soci-
eties. But there is a gaping lacuna in his argument. In a modern world in
which the path to riches lies through industrialization, why are bad-tempered
zebras and hippos the barrier to economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa? Why

8. Diamond, 1997.

t R O  UCT o   3


didn’t the Industrial Revolution free Africa, New Guinea, and South America
from their old geographic disadvantages, rather than accentuate their back-
wardness? And why did the takeover of Australia by the British propel a part
of   the world that had not developed settled agriculture by 1800 into the first
rank among developed economies?

The selection mechanisms discussed earlier can help explain how an ini-
tial advantage in establishing settled agrarian societies in Europe, China, and
Japan, possibly from geography, was translated into a persistent cultural ad-
vantage in later economic competition. Societies without such a long experi-
ence of settled, pacific agrarian society cannot instantly adopt the institutions
and technologies of the more advanced economies, because they have not yet
culturally adapted to the demands of productive capitalism.

But history also teaches us that, even within societies of the same tradi-
tion and history, there can be regions and periods of economic energy and
regions and periods of economic torpor. The economic fortunes of the north
and south of England reversed after World War I; Ireland has become as rich
as England after being significantly poorer for at least two hundred years;
southern Germany has overtaken northern Germany.

These variations in the economic vitality of societies existed across the
Malthusian era, and they continue to exist to this day. But in the Malthusian
era the effects of these variations were dampened by the economic system.
They mainly determined population densities. Polish farm workers in
the early nineteenth century, for example, were allegedly slovenly, idle, and
drunken compared to their British counterparts.9 Yet living standards were
little higher in England than in Poland. Instead Poland was very lightly pop-
ulated. Since the Industrial Revolution such differences in the economic envi-
ronment show up as variations in income levels.

Shifts in the nature of production technologies have further widened
international income gaps. While Polish workers had low hourly outputs in
farm tasks compared to workers in preindustrial England and the United
States, the quality of their output was not markedly inferior. Polish wheat
could still, after rescreening, be retailed at full price on the British market.
When the majority of the tasks in agriculture consisted of such things as dig-
ging drainage ditches, spreading manure, and beating straw with a stick to ex-
tract the grain, the attitudes of the workers were not particularly important.

9. Jacob, 1826, 30, 65, 79–80.

4  chat R 


However, modern production technologies, developed in rich countries,
are designed for labor forces that are disciplined, conscientious, and engaged.
Products flow through many sets of hands, each one capable of destroying
most  of the value of the final output. Error rates by individual workers must
be kept low to allow such processes to succeed.10 The introduction of such
techniques in nineteenth-century England was accompanied by greater at-
tention to worker discipline. When workers in poor countries lack these qual-
ities of discipline and engagement, modern production systems are feasible only
when little is demanded of each worker, to keep error rates as low as possible.
This concept helps explain the dramatically lower observed work efforts of
textile mill workers in such poor countries as India. It is cheaper to have fre-
quently idle workers than idle machinery or defective output.

The Rise of Wealth and the Decline of Economics

Economics as a discipline arose in the dying decades of the Malthusian era.
Classical economics was a brilliantly successful description of this world. But
the torrent of goods unleashed by the Industrial Revolution not only created
extremes of wealth and poverty across nations, it also undermined the ability
of economic theory to explain these differences.

Thus there is a great irony in economic history. In most areas of inquiry

—astronomy, archaeology, paleontology, biology, history—knowledge declines
as we move away from our time, our planet, our society. In the distant mists
lurk the strange objects: quasars, dwarf human species, hydrogen sulfide–fueled
bacteria. But in economics the Malthusian era, however odd, is the known
world. Preindustrial living standards are predictable based on knowledge of dis-
ease and environment. Differences in social energy across societies were muted
by the Malthusian constraints. They had minimal impacts on living condi-
tions. Since the Industrial Revolution, however, we have entered a strange new
world in which economic theory is of little use in understanding differences in
income across societies, or the future income in any specific society. Wealth and
poverty are a matter of differences in local social interactions that are magnified,
not dampened, by the economic system, to produce feast or famine.

The final great surprise that economic history offers—which was revealed
only within the past thirty years—is that material affluence, the decline in

10. Kremer, 1993a.

t R O  UCT o   5


child mortality, the extension of adult life spans, and reduced inequality have
not made us any happier than our hunter-gatherer forebears. High incomes
profoundly shape lifestyles in the modern developed world. But wealth has
not brought happiness. Another foundational assumption of economics is
incorrect.

Within any society the rich are happier than the poor. But, as was first
observed by Richard Easterlin in 1974, rapidly rising incomes for everyone in
the successful economies since 1950 have not produced greater happiness.11 In
Japan, for example, from 1958 to 2004 income per person rose nearly seven-
fold, while self-reported happiness, instead of rising, declined modestly. It is
evident that our happiness depends not on our absolute well-being but instead
on how we are doing relative to our reference group. Each individual—by ac-
quiring more income, by buying a larger house, by driving a more elegant
car—can make herself happier, but happier only at the expense of those
with less income, meaner housing, and junkier cars. Money does buy hap-
piness, but that happiness is transferred from someone else, not added to the
common pool.

That is why, despite the enormous income gap between rich and poor so-
cieties today, reported happiness is only modestly lower in the poorest soci-
eties. And this despite the fact that the citizens of poor nations, through the
medium of television, can witness almost firsthand the riches of successful
economies. It thus might be that there is no absolute effect of income on
happiness, even at the lowest income levels. The people of the world of 1800,
in  which all societies were relatively poor and communities were much more
local in scope, were likely just as happy as the wealthiest nations of the world
today, such as the United States.

Since we are for the most part the descendants of the strivers of the pre-
industrial world, those driven to achieve greater economic success than their
peers, perhaps these findings reflect another cultural or biological heritage
from the Malthusian era. The contented may well have lost out in the Dar-
winian struggle that defined the world before 1800. Those who were success-
ful  in the economy of the Malthusian era could well have been driven by a
need to have more than their peers in order to be happy. Modern man might
not be designed for contentment. The envious have inherited the earth.

11. Easterlin, 1974; Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004.

6  chat R 


PA RT I

The Malthusian Trap:
Economic Life to 8



2  The Logic of the Malthusian Economy

No arts; no letters; no society; and which is worst of all, continual fear, and dan-
ger of violent death: and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short.

—Thomas Hobbes (1651)1

The vast majority of human societies, from the original foragers of the
African savannah through settled agrarian societies until about 1800, led an
economic life shaped and governed by one simple fact: in the long run births
had to equal deaths. Since this same logic governs all animal species, until
1800 in this “natural” economy the economic laws for humans were the same
as for all animal species. The break between the economics of humans and the
economics of the rest of the animal world occurred within the past two hun-
dred years.

It is commonly assumed that the huge changes in the technology avail-
able to people and in the organizational complexity of societies, between our
ancestors on the savannah and those in England at the time of the Industrial
Revolution, must have improved material life even before modern economic
growth began. For example, Angus Maddison, the much-quoted creator of
preindustrial economic data, hazarded estimates of income per person for
millennia before 1820 on this basis.2 But in this chapter I show that the logic
of  the natural economy implies that the material living standard of the aver-
age person in the agrarian economies of 1800 was, if anything, worse than that
of our remote ancestors. Hobbes, in the quote that opens this chapter, was

1. Hobbes, 1651, 84.

2. Maddison, 2001, 28, for example, estimates that GDP per capita in western Europe
more than doubled from $450 in AD 1 to $1,232 by 1820 (in 1990 dollars), while for Japan the
rise was from $400 to $669.

9


profoundly wrong to believe that man was any worse off in the natural state
than in the England of 1651.

This chapter develops a model of the preindustrial economy, the Malthu-
sian model, from three simple and seemingly innocuous assumptions. This
model has profound implications for how the economy functioned before
1800, which are then tested and explored in the following four chapters.

The Malthusian Equilibrium

Women, over the course of their reproductive lives, can give birth to twelve
or more children. In some current societies the average woman still gives birth
to more than six children. Yet in the world before 1800 the number of chil-
dren per woman that survived to adulthood was always just a little above two.
World population grew from perhaps 0.1 million in 130,000 BC to 770 mil-
lion by 1800. But this still represents an average of 2.005 surviving children
per woman before 1800. Even within successful preindustrial economies, such
as those in western Europe, long-run rates of population growth were very
small. Table 2.1 shows population in 1300 and 1800, and the implied numbers
of surviving children per woman, for several western European countries.
None of these societies deviated far from two surviving children per woman.
Some force must have kept population growth rates within rather strict limits
over the long run.

The Malthusian model supplies a mechanism to explain this long-run
population stability. In the simplest version there are just three assumptions:

1. Each society has a birth rate, determined by customs regulating fer-
tility, but increasing with material living standards.

2. The death rate in each society declines as living standards increase.

3. Material living standards decline as population increases.

The birth rate is just the number of births per year per person, for con-
venience normally quoted as births per thousand people. Maximum observed
fertility levels have been 50–60. But the birth rate varies significantly even
across preindustrial societies. Preindustrial England sometimes had birth
rates of less than 30. As recently as 2000 in Africa, the area of highest birth rates,
some countries had rates exceeding 50 per thousand: Niger, 55; Somalia, 52;
Uganda, 51.

2  chat R 2


Table 2.

Populations in Western Europe, 1300 and 1800

Population    Population    Surviving children

Location         ca. 1300      ca. 1800       per woman

Norwaya           0.40        0.88         2.095

Southern Italyb        4.75        7.9          2.061

Francec            17.0        27.2          2.056

Englandd           5.8         8.7          2.049

Northern Italyb        7.75       10.2          2.033

Icelanda            0.084       0.047         1.930

Sources: aTomasson, 1977, 406. bFederico and Malanima, 2004, table 4. cLe Roy Ladurie,

1981, 13.dClark, 2007a, 120.

The death rate is again just deaths per year per person, also typically
quoted per thousand people. In a stationary population, one of constant size,
life expectancy at birth is the inverse of the death rate.3 Thus if death rates are
33 per thousand, life expectancy at birth is thirty years. At a death rate of 20
per thousand, life expectancy would rise to fifty.

In a stationary population birth rates equal death rates. So in stationary
populations, which were characteristic of the preindustrial world, life ex-
pectancy  at birth is also the inverse of the birth rate. Thus in preindustrial so-
ciety the only way to achieve high life expectancies was by limiting births. If
preindustrial populations had displayed the fertility levels of modern Niger,
life expectancy at birth would have been less than twenty.

The material living standard refers to the average amount of goods and
services (e.g., religious ceremonies, barbers, servants) that people in a society
consume. When new goods are introduced over time, such as newspapers,
Wedgwood fine porcelain, and vacations at the seaside, it can be tricky to
compare societies in terms of the purchasing power of their real wages. But
for most of human history, and for all societies before 1800, the bulk of ma-
terial consumption was food, shelter, and clothing, so their material living
standards can be measured more accurately. In societies sophisticated enough
to  have a labor market, the material living standard for the bulk of the

3. Formally, if e₀ is life expectancy at birth and D is the death rate, e₀= 1/D.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo   2


Birth rate

Death rate

y*      y ₀

N

N ₀

y*      y ₀

Income per person

Figure 2. Long-run equilibrium in the Malthusian economy.

population will be determined by the purchasing power of the wages of un-
skilled workers.

Figure 2.1 shows graphically the three assumptions of the simple Mal-
thusian model.4 The horizontal axis for both panels is material income, the
amount of goods and services available to each person. In the top panel birth
and death rates are plotted on the vertical axis. The material income at which
birth rates equal death rates is called the subsistence income, denoted in the
figure as y*. This is the income that just allows the population to reproduce
itself. At material incomes above this the birth rate exceeds the death rate and
population is growing. At material incomes below this the death rate exceeds
the  birth rate and population declines. Notice that this subsistence income is
determined without any reference to the production technology of the soci-
ety.    It depends only on the factors that determine the birth rate and those that

4. The graphical exposition here follows that of Lee and Schofield, 1981.

22  chat R 2


determine the death rate. Once we know these we can determine the subsis-
tence income and life expectancy at birth.

In the bottom panel population is shown on the vertical axis. Once we
know population, that determines income and in turn the birth rate and
death rates.

With just these assumptions it is easy to show that the economy will al-
ways move in the long run to the level of real incomes at which birth rates
equal death rates. Suppose population starts at an arbitrary initial popula-
tion, N₀ in the diagram. This will imply an initial income y₀. Since y₀ exceeds
the subsistence income, births exceed deaths and population grows. As it
grows, income declines. As long as the income exceeds the subsistence level
population growth will continue, and income will continue to fall. Only when
income has fallen to the subsistence level will population growth cease at the
equilibrium level, N*, and the population stabilize.

Suppose that instead the initial population had been so large that the
income was below subsistence. Then deaths would exceed births and popula-
tion would fall. This would push up incomes. The process would continue
until income was again at the subsistence level. Thus wherever population
starts from in this society it always ends up at N*, with income at subsistence.
The term subsistence income can lead to the incorrect notion that in a
Malthusian economy people are all living on the brink of starvation, like the
inmates of some particularly nasty Soviet-era gulag. In fact in almost all Mal-
thusian economies the subsistence income considerably exceeded the income

required to allow the population to feed itself from day to day.

Differences in the location of the mortality and fertility schedules across
societies also generated very different subsistence incomes. Subsistence for
one society was extinction for others. Both 1400 and 1650, for example, fell
within periods of population stability in England, hence periods in which by
definition the income was at subsistence. But the wage of the poorest workers,
unskilled agricultural laborers, was equivalent to about 9 pounds of wheat per
day  in 1650, compared to 18 pounds in 1400. Even the lower 1650 subsistence
wage was well above the biologically determined minimum daily requirement
of about 1,500 calories a day. A diet of a mere 2 pounds of wheat per day,
supplying 2,400 calories per day, would keep a laborer alive and fit for work.
Thus preindustrial societies, while they were subsistence economies, were not
typically starvation economies. Indeed, with favorable conditions, they were
at times wealthy, even by the standards of many modern societies.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo  23


The assumption that is key to the observation that income always re-
turns to the subsistence level is the third one, of a fixed trade-off between
population and material income per person. For reasons given below, this trade-
off   is called the technology schedule.

The justification for the decline in material incomes with higher popula-
tion is the famous Law of Diminishing Returns introduced to economics by
David Ricardo (and independently by Malthus). Any production system em-
ploys a variety of inputs, the principal ones being land, labor, and capital. The
Law of Diminishing Returns holds that, if one of the inputs to production is
fixed, then employing more of any of the other inputs will increase output,
but by progressively smaller increments. That is, the output per unit of the
other input factors will decline as their use in production is expanded, as long
as one input factor remains fixed.

In the preindustrial era land was the key production factor that was in-
herently fixed in supply. This limited supply implied that average output per
worker would fall as the labor supply increased in any society, as long as the
technology of that society remained unchanged. Consequently average mate-
rial income per person fell with population growth.

Figure 2.2 shows the assumed relationship between labor input and the
value of output for preindustrial societies that underlies the third assumption
of the Malthusian model. In economics the increase in the value of output
from adding one more worker is called the marginal product of that person.
In market economies this equals the wage.5 As can be seen in the figure, the
marginal product declines as more workers are added, and so does the wage.
Average output per person also falls as the population rises. The additional
output from the last person added to the economy is less than the output per
person from existing workers.6

To appreciate concretely why this will happen, consider a peasant farmer
with 50 acres of land. If he alone cultivates the land then he will maximize out-
put by using low-intensity cultivation methods: keeping cattle or sheep which
are left to fend for themselves and periodically culled for meat and hides, as
with the Argentinean pampas in the early nineteenth century. With the labor

5. This is just the slope of the curve at any labor input.

6. Average output per person is the slope of the straight line drawn from the origin to the
output curve at any given level of labor input.

24  chat R 2


Total output

Marginal output


Figure 2.2

Number of workers

Labor input and output on a given area of land.

of an additional person milk cows could also be kept, increasing total output.
With yet more labor the property could be cultivated as arable land with grain
crops. Arable land requires much more labor input per acre than pasture,
given the need for plowing, sowing, harvesting, threshing, and manuring.
But arable land also yields a greater value of output per acre. With even more
people the land could be cultivated more intensively as garden land, growing
vegetables and tubers as well, thus increasing output yet further. Yields are
increased by ever more careful utilization of manure, and by suppression of
competing weeds by manual hoeing. With enough labor input the output of
any  acre of land can be very high. In the agricultural systems of coastal China
and Japan around 1800, an acre of land was enough to support a family. In
Ireland before the potato famine of 1845, an acre of potatoes, with careful
spade husbandry, could supply to a family more than 6 tons of potatoes a
year, 36 pounds a day, nearly enough to subsist on.7 In the same period in
England there were nearly 20 acres of land per farm worker.

We can also see in figure 2.1 that the sole determinants of the subsistence
income are the birth rate and death rate schedules. Knowing just these we can
determine the subsistence income. The connection shown in the lower panel
between income and population level serves only to determine the population
that corresponds to the subsistence income.

7. Ó Gráda, 1999, 227.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo  25


Birth rate₁

Birth rate₀

Death rate

y ₁ *   y ₀ *

N ₁ *

N ₀ *

y ₁ *   y ₀ *


Figure 2.3

Income per person

Changes in the birth rate schedule.

Changes in the Birth Rate and Death Rate Schedules

Different societies will have different birth rate and death rate schedules, that
is, the birth and death rates at given incomes, and these schedules can change
within a society over time. Suppose, for example, that the birth rate schedule
increased, as in figure 2.3. It is then simple to see what happens to the death
rate, material incomes, and the population. In the short run births exceed
deaths. Population thus grows, driving down real income, and increasing the
death rate until deaths again equal births. At the new equilibrium real income
is lower and population is greater. Any increase in birth rates in the Malthu-
sian world drives down real incomes. Conversely anything which limits birth
rates drives up real income. Since life expectancy at birth in the Malthusian
era was just the inverse of the birth rate, as long as birth rates remained high,
life expectancy had to be low. Preindustrial society could thus raise both ma-
terial living standards and life expectancy by limiting births.

26  chat R 2


Birth rate

Death rate₀
Death rate₁

y ₁ *   y ₀ *

N ₁ *

N ₀ *

y ₁ *   y ₀ *


Figure 2.4

Income per person

Changes in the death rate schedule.

Again if the death rate schedule moves down, as in figure 2.4, so that at
each income there is a lower death rate, then at the current income births
exceed deaths, so that population falls. This again drives down real income
until the death rate once more equals the birth rate. At the new equilibrium
population is higher and income lower. Given the now lower birth rate, how-
ever,  life expectancy would be somewhat higher. So improvements in sanitation,
or declines in violence and disorder, which reduce the death rate schedule in
preindustrial societies, can raise life expectancy, but only at the cost of lower
material living standards.

This Malthusian world thus exhibits a counterintuitive logic. Anything
that raised the death rate schedule—war, disorder, disease, poor sanitary prac-
tices, or abandoning breast feeding—increased material living standards. Any-
thing that reduced the death rate schedule—advances in medical technology,
better personal hygiene, improved public sanitation, public provision for har-
vest failures, peace and order—reduced material living standards.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo  27


Birth rate

Death rate

y*

N ₁ *

N ₀ *


Figure 2.5

y*

Income per person

Effects of isolated technological advance.

Changes in Technology

The real income in Malthusian economies was determined from the birth rate
and death rate schedules alone. Once this income was determined the popu-
lation size depended just on how many people could be supported at this in-
come level given the land area and technology of the society. For each soci-
ety, depending on the land area and the production technology, there was a
schedule connecting each population level with a given real income level.
This  is called the technology schedule, because the major cause of changes in
this schedule has been technological advance. But other factors could also
shift this schedule: the availability of more capital, improved trade possibili-
ties, climate changes, or better economic institutions.

Figure 2.5 shows the path of adjustment from an isolated improvement in
technology: a switch from an inferior technology, represented by curve T₀, to
a superior technology, represented by curve T₁. Since population can change
only slowly, the short-run effect of a technological improvement was an in-

28  chat R 2


crease in real incomes. But the increased income reduced the death rate,
births exceeded deaths, and population grew. The growth of population only
ended when income returned to subsistence. At the new equilibrium the only
effect of the technological change was to increase the population. There was
no lasting gain in living standards.

The Malthusian Model and Economic Growth

In the millennia leading up to 1800 there were significant improvements in
production technologies, though these improvements happened slowly and
sporadically. The technology of England in 1800—which included cheap
iron and steel, cheap coal for energy, canals to transport goods, firearms,
and sophisticated sailing ships—was hugely advanced compared to the tech-
nology of hunter-gatherers in the Paleolithic, before the development of settled
agriculture.

The degree of technological advance was revealed in the encounters be-
tween Europeans and isolated Polynesian islanders in the 1760s. The English
sailors who arrived in Tahiti in 1767 on the Dolphin, for example, found a so-
ciety with no metals. The Europeans’ iron was so valuable to the Tahitians that
a single 3-inch nail could initially be bartered for a 20-pound pig or a sexual
encounter. Given the enthusiasm of the sailors for the sex trade, nail prices
two weeks later had dropped by half, and “the Carpenter came and told me
every cleat in the ship was drawn, and all the Nails carried off . . . most of
the hammock nails was drawn, and two-thirds of the men obliged to lie on
the Deck for want of nails to hang their Hammocks.”8 When Captain Cook
arrived at a similarly isolated Hawaii the local inhabitants on a number of
occasions stole ship’s boats to burn them to retrieve the nails.

But, though technology was advancing before 1800, the rate of advance
was always slow relative to that in the world after 1800. Figure 2.6, for ex-
ample, shows the actual location of the technology curve of the Malthusian
model for England from 1200 to 1800. The figure shows income per person
by decade versus population. The observations for each decade are linked to
show the movement of the population and income combinations over time.
English population showed dramatic variation in the preindustrial period.

8. Robertson, 1955, 32, 78, 104. When Captain Cook arrived in 1769 he was shocked to
find that the locals now demanded a hatchet for a pig; Banks, 1962, 252.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo  29


1790s

8

6        1310s


1600

4

2

1200s

1450s

0

0     20     40     60     80     100


Figure 2.6

Income per person (1860s = 100)

Revealed technological advance in England, 1200–1800.

There was growth in the medieval period from 1200 to 1316; at six million, the
population in 1316 was as great as in the early eighteenth century. But the ar-
rival from Asia of the bubonic plague (the so-called Black Death) in 1348
caused a long period of population decline from then to the 1450s.9 By then
England had barely two million people. Population grew again from 1540 to
1640 as the plague loosened its hold. From 1200 to 1650, as population
changed under the influence of disease shocks, the income-population points
lie along one downward-sloping line. This implies a completely stagnant pro-
duction technology for 450 years. After 1650 the implied technology curve
shifts upward, but not fast enough to cause significant increases in output per
person. Instead technological advance, as predicted, resulted mainly in more
people. In particular in the later eighteenth century all technological advance
created only a larger population without generating any income gains. Before
1800 the rate of technological advance in all economies was so low that in-
comes could not escape the Malthusian equilibrium.

Because I want to show that the same economic model applies to all soci-
eties before 1800, even those with no labor market, and also to animal popula-

9. The popular term Black Death for the plague was introduced in England only hun-
dreds of year after its onset.

3  chat R 2


tions, the Malthusian model has been developed in terms of material consump-
tion per person. However, Thomas Malthus (1766–1834) and David Ricardo
(1772–1823), who first formulated the Malthusian model and the associated eco-
nomic doctrines now called classical economics, thought in terms of the wages
of unskilled workers.10 Thus Ricardo, using similar logic, argued that real
wages (as opposed to income per person, which includes land rents and returns
on capital) must always eventually return to the subsistence level.11 Ricardo’s
proposition later became known as the Iron Law of Wages. Classical economics
thus denied the possibility of other than transitory improvements in the living
standards of unskilled workers. All the above reasoning about birth rates, death
rates, population, and incomes can be carried out equivalently in terms of wages.
In light of subsequent events, the Iron Law of Wages may seem like an
absurd proposition on which to found classical economics. But we shall see
that the Malthusian model is an accurate description of all societies before
1800. The propositions of classical economics were developed at a time, 1798–
1817, when real wages in England had been stationary or declining for gener-
ations. Though the innovations associated with the Industrial Revolution
began appearing in the 1760s, their significance was not widely appreciated
at the time. Technical progress in production technologies still seemed mod-
est, sporadic, and accidental before 1820. Figure 2.7 shows the rural setting of
Malthus’s employment while working on his famous essay. Real wages did not
begin the almost continual rise that characterizes the successful economies of
the modern world until the 1820s. For some groups—such as the agricultural
laborers in the south of England to whom Malthus ministered to as a parson
while writing his Essay on the Principle of Population—real wages declined
substantially between 1760 and 1820. Indeed one of the great social concerns
of    the years 1780–1834 in England was the rising tax burden on rural property

owners created by payments to support the poor under the Poor Law.

Thus Malthus and Ricardo predicted that, as long as fertility remained
unchanged, economic growth could not in the long run improve the human
condition. All that growth would produce would be a larger population living
at   the subsistence income. China, for Malthus, was the embodiment of this
type of economy. Though the Chinese had made great advances in agricul-

10. They did so in part because in the era in which they wrote there were scant available
measures of income per person.

11. McCulloch, 1881, 50–58.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo   3


Figure 2.7 The church in Okewood, where Malthus earned his living as a curate while

working on his essay. Malthus probably lived at his father’s house in nearby Albury, whose
population of 510 in 1801 had grown to 929 by 1831.

tural drainage and flood control, and had achieved high levels of output per
acre, they still had very low material living standards because of the country’s
dense population. Thus, Malthus wrote of China, “If the accounts we have of
it are to be trusted, the lower classes of people are in the habit of living almost
upon the smallest possible quantity of food and are glad to get any putrid of-
fals that European labourers would rather starve than eat.”12

In the preindustrial world sporadic technological advance produced peo-
ple, not wealth.

Human and Animal Economies

The economic laws we have derived in this chapter for the preindustrial hu-
man economy are precisely those that apply to all animal, and indeed plant,

12. Malthus, 1798, 115.

32  chat R 2


populations. Before 1800 there was no fundamental distinction between the
economies of humans and those of other animal and plant species. This was
also a point Malthus appreciated: “Elevated as man is above all other animals
by his intellectual faculties, it is not to be supposed that the physical laws to
which he is subjected should be essentially different from those which are ob-
served to prevail in other parts of the animated nature.”13

Thus the Malthusian model dominates in evolutionary ecology as well.
For animal and plant species population equilibrium is similarly attained
when birth rates equal death rates. Birth and death rates are both assumed to
be dependant on the quality of the habitat, the analogue of the human level
of technology, and population density. Ecological studies typically consider
just the direct link between birth and death rates and population density,
without considering the intermediate links, such as material consumption, as
I  have done above. But the Malthusian model for humans could also be con-
structed in this more reductionist way.

At least some ecological studies find that population density affects mor-
tality in ways that are analogous to those we have posited for human popula-
tions, through the supply of food available per animal. Thus one study showed
that over forty years wildebeest mortality rates depended largely on the avail-
able food supply per animal: “the main cause of mortality (75 percent of cases)
was undernutrition.”14 Hence the Industrial Revolution after 1800 repre-
sented the first break of human society from the constraints of nature, the first
break of the human economy from the natural economy.

Political Economy in the Malthusian Era

Malthus’s essay was written in part as a response to the views of his father,
who was a follower of the eighteenth-century Utopian writers William God-
win and the Marquis de Condorcet. Godwin and de Condorcet argued that
the misery, unhappiness, and vice so common in the world were the result not
of unalterable human nature but of bad government.15 Malthus wanted to
establish that poverty was not the product of institutions, and that conse-
quently changes in political institutions could not improve the human lot. As

13. Malthus, 1830, 225.

14. Mduma et al., 1999, 1101.

15. Godwin, 1793; Condorcet, 1795.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo   33


we have seen, in a world of only episodic technological advance, such as
England in 1798, his case was compelling.

Certainly one implication of the Malthusian model, which helped give
classical economics its seemingly harsh cast, was that any move to redistribute
income to the poor (who at that time in England were mainly unskilled farm
laborers) would result in the long run only in more poor, perhaps employed
at  even lower wages. As Ricardo noted in 1817, “The clear and direct tendency
of the poor laws is in direct opposition to these obvious principles: it is not,
as the legislature benevolently intended, to amend the condition of the poor,
but to deteriorate the condition of both poor and rich.”16 The poor laws would
lower wages because they aided in particular those with children, thus reduc-
ing the costs of fertility and driving up the birth rate.

The arguments of Malthus and his fellow classical economists not only
suggested the inability of government to improve the human lot through tra-
ditional methods, they also implied that many of the government policies
that the classical economists attacked—taxation, monopolies, trade barriers
such as the Corn Laws, wasteful government spending—would similarly have
no effect on human welfare in the long run. But the classical economists did
not see this.

Indeed, if we follow the logic laid out here, good government in the
modern sense—stable institutions, well-defined property rights, low inflation
rates, low marginal tax rates, free markets, free trade, avoidance of armed
conflict—would either make no difference to material living standards in the
Malthusian era or indeed lower living standards.

To take one example, suppose that the preindustrial king or emperor
levied a poll tax on every person in the economy, equivalent to 10 percent of
average income. Suppose also that, as was the wont of such sovereigns, the pro-
ceeds of the tax were simply frittered away on palaces, cathedrals, mosques, or
temples; on armies; or to stock a large harem. Despite the waste, in the long
run this action would have no effect on the welfare of the average person.

To understand why, refer back to figure 2.1. The tax would act like a
shock to the technology of the economy, shifting the lower curve uniformly

16. McCulloch, 1881, 58. Thus classical economics was influential in creating the draco-
nian reforms of poor relief in England in 1834. The most influential member of the Poor Law
Commission set up to examine the workings of the old Poor Law was Nassau Senior, professor
of  political economy at Oxford University.

34  chat R 2


left by 10 percent. Initially, with the existing stock of people, the tax reduces
incomes per person by 10 percent, thus driving up death rates above birth
rates. But in the long run after-tax incomes must return to their previous level
to stabilize population again. At this point population is sufficiently smaller
that everyone earns a high enough wage that, after paying the tax, they have
sufficient funds left over to equal their old pretax earnings. In the long run ex-
actions by the state have no effect in the Malthusian economy on welfare or
life expectancy. Luxury, waste, extravagance by the sovereign—all had no cost
to the average citizen in the long run! Restrictions on trade and obstructive
guild rules were similarly costless.

Thus at the time the Wealth of Nations was published in 1776, when the
Malthusian economy still governed human welfare in England, the calls
of Adam Smith for restraint in government taxation and unproductive ex-
penditure were largely pointless. Good government could not make coun-
tries rich except in the short run, before population growth restored the
equilibrium.17

So far we have considered only actions by government that shift the
effective consumption possibilities for a society. Governments could also
directly affect birth rates and death rates through their policies. War, ban-
ditry, and disorder all increased death rates at given levels of income (though
war often killed more through the spread of disease than from direct vio-
lence). But all increases in death rates make societies better off in material
terms. Here “bad” government actually makes people better off in mate-
rial terms, though with a reduced life expectancy. Good governments—those
that, for example, store grains in public granaries as a hedge against harvest
failures, as in some periods in Imperial Rome and late Imperial China—just
make life more miserable by reducing the periodic death rate from famines at
any given average material living standard.18

It is thus ironic that—while the classical economists, and in particular
Adam Smith, are taken as their intellectual fathers by modern proponents of
limited government—their views made little sense in the world in which they
were composed.

17. It is explained in chapter 5 that high incomes in eighteenth-century England probably
owed more to bad personal hygiene than to advances in political economy.

18. In China state granaries in the eighteenth century routinely distributed grain to the
poor. See Will and Wong, 1991, 482–83.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo  35


Income Inequality and Living Standards

Preindustrial societies differed in their degree of income inequality. Based on
modern evidence, forager societies were egalitarian in consumption. In such
communities there was no land or capital to own, while in settled agrarian
societies as much as half of all income could derive from ownership of assets.
Furthermore, forager societies were typically characterized by a social ethic
that mandated sharing. Thus, for example, even the labor income of success-
ful hunters was taxed by the less successful.

Agrarian societies from the earliest times were much more unequal. The
richest members of these societies commanded thousands of times the aver-
age income of the average adult male. Aristocrats, such as the Duke of Bed-
ford in England in 1798, resided in a state of luxury that the farm laborers on
his extensive estates could hardly comprehend.

The Malthusian model takes no account of income distribution. But, by
analogy with the discussion of the previous section on taxation and living
standards, we can see that greater inequality will have little or no effect on the
living standards of the landless workers, the mass of the population. The more
equally land rents and capital income are distributed across the general pop-
ulation the more these rents will simply be dissipated in larger population
sizes. If these rents were instead appropriated by an aristocratic elite, as they
were in many preindustrial societies, then they could be enjoyed with little
or no cost to the rest of the population. Thus while inequality could not make
the median person better off in the Malthusian world, it could raise average
income per person by raising the incomes of the propertied elite.

Thus it was possible that England, France, or Italy in 1800 could have a
higher income per person than the original foragers. But perversely they would
achieve this higher income only through their achievement of greater inequal-
ity than earlier societies. And the boost to income per person from inequality
was limited. Land rents and capital income made up perhaps half of all income
in settled agrarian societies. The expropriation of all these incomes by an elite
would double income per person compared to a state of complete inequality.
In summary table 2.2 shows Malthusian “virtues” and “vices.” But virtue
and vice here are measured with reference only to whether actions raised or

lowered material income per person.19

19. Chapter 3 explains why indolence is a virtue in Malthusian economies.

36  chat R 2


Table 2.2 Malthusian “Virtues” and “Vices”

“Virtues”        “Vices”

Fertility limitation    Fecundity

Bad sanitation      Cleanliness

Violence         Peace

Harvest failures     Public granaries

Infanticide        Parental solicitude

Income inequality    Income equality

Selfishness        Charity

Indolence        Hard work

The Neolithic Revolution and Living Standards

The great economic transformation of the preindustrial era was the Neolithic
Revolution: the move from hunter-gatherer societies to those with economies
based  on cultivated crops and domesticated animals. Anthropologists and
archaeologists have long debated what effect this transformation had on living
standards, with many believing that farming reduced them. Jared Diamond
has  even gone so far as to argue that “Forced to choose between limiting pop-
ulation or trying to increase food production, we chose the latter and ended
up with starvation, warfare, and tyranny.”20

The empirical data are inconclusive. We shall see in chapters 3–5 that
the evidence, on balance, is that living standards in the broadest sense—
consumption, leisure, life expectancy—did decline after the spread of settled
agriculture, but with significant variation across different agrarian societies. We
will  find in the following chapters that these modest declines are explained by
the fact that the birth rates of forager and settled agrarian societies were likely
the same, and death rates at a given income differed little. The ability to store
food in settled agrarian societies, which allowed for survival of lean periods
and so reduced death rates, would reduce living standards. On the other hand,
increased disease mortality from greater population densities helped increase
material living standards. The net result of these effects could go either way.
Thus the effect of settled agriculture on living standards in a Malthusian
world is inherently ambiguous.

20. Diamond, 1987, 66. See also Cohen, 1977; Kaplan, 2000.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo  37


The failure of settled agriculture to improve living conditions, and the
possibility that living conditions fell with the arrival of agriculture, have led
some economists, anthropologists, and archaeologists to puzzle over why man-
kind abandoned the superior hunter-gatherer lifestyle for inferior agrarian
societies.21 But within the framework of the Malthusian model there is no
puzzle. Agriculture was adopted because it was initially a better technology,
which generated higher incomes. But those higher incomes inevitably led to
larger populations and a decrease of living standards to a new Malthusian
equilibrium, seemingly one less favorable than that for the previous hunter-
gatherer societies.

Material Conditions: Paleolithic to Jane Austen

This chapter explained the first claim made in the introduction, that living
standards in 1800, even in England, were likely no higher than for our ances-
tors   of the African savannah. Since preindustrial living standards were deter-
mined solely by fertility and mortality, the only way living standards could be
higher in 1800 would be if either mortality rates were greater at a given real
income or fertility was lower.

This conclusion may seem too powerful in the light of figures 1.1 and 1.2.
But the upper class about whom authors such as Jane Austen wrote were a
small group within English society. In Sense and Sensibility one of her charac-
ters says, of an income of £300 a year from a rectory, “This little rectory can
do no more than make Mr. Ferrars comfortable as a bachelor; it cannot en-
able him to marry.”22 In contrast the mass of farm laborers in England in 1810
had an annual income of £36 or less per year.

Even though England was one of the richest economies in the world, its
people lived by modern standards a pinched and straightened existence. If
employed they labored three hundred days a year, with just Sundays and the
occasional other day off. The work day in winter was all the daylight hours.
Their diet consisted of bread, a little cheese, bacon fat, and weak tea, supple-
mented for adult males by beer. The diet was low in calories given their heavy
manual labor, and they must often have been hungry. The monotony was re-
lieved to some degree by the harvest period, in which work days were long

21. See, for example, Cohen, 1977, and Richerson et al., 2001.

22. Austen, 1957, 247.

38  chat R 2


but the farmers typically supplied plenty of food. Hot meals were few since
fuel for cooking was expensive. The laborers generally slept once it got dark
since candles for lighting were again beyond their means. They would hope
to get a new set of clothes once a year. Whole families of five or six people
would live in two-room cottages, heated by wood or coal fires.23 Almost
nothing they consumed—food, clothing, heat, light, or shelter—would have
been unfamiliar to the inhabitants of ancient Mesopotamia. Had consumers in
8000 BC had access to more plentiful food, including meat, and more floor
space, they could easily have enjoyed a lifestyle that English workers in 1800
would have preferred to their own.

In the following three chapters I show that all the major empirical im-
plications of the Malthusian model hold true for the world in the years be-
fore 1800.

23. Eden, 1797; Clark, 2001b.

th lo G c o th alth US a c oo  39


3  Living Standards

[Tierra del Fuego, 1832] These poor wretches were stunted in their growth. . . . 
If a seal is killed, or the floating carcass of a putrid whale discovered, it is a feast;
and such miserable food is assisted by a few tasteless berries and fungi.

—Charles Darwin (1839)1

[Tahiti, 1769] These happy people may almost be said to be exempt from the
curse of our forefather; scarcely can it be said that they earn their bread with the
sweat of their brow when their cheifest sustenance Bread fruit is procurd with no
more trouble than that of climbing a tree and pulling it down.

—Joseph Banks (1769)2

The logic of the Malthusian economy is clear. There should be no systematic
gain in living standards on average across societies between earliest man and
the world of 1800 on the eve of the Industrial Revolution. Disease, war, in-
fanticide, and customs regulating marriage and sex could elevate material liv-
ing standards. But on balance the happy circumstances that made for Tahiti
in 1769, or the unhappy ones that made for Tierra del Fuego in 1832, were no
more likely in AD 1800 than in 100,000 BC. In this chapter I consider the
empirical evidence for this first crucial contention of the Malthusian model
of society. Were material living standards truly no better on average in 1800
than in 10,000 BC or even 100,000 BC?

Real Wages before 1800

Since the poorest half of any society typically lives on their wages alone, with-
out any property income, measures of real wages provide a good index of living
standards in any society. Yet comprehensive measures of wages are available
for  only a few societies before 1800, and only in rare cases can we get good
measures as early as 1200.

Preindustrial England, however, has a uniquely well-documented wage
and price history. The relative stability of English institutions after the Nor-

1. Darwin, 1965, 203.

2. Banks, 1962, 341.

4


200

175

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

Building laborers

Farm laborers

1200   1300   1400   1500   1600   1700   1800

Figure 3. English laborers’ real wages, 1209–1809.

man Conquest of 1066, and the early development of markets, allowed a large
number of documents with wages and prices to survive. Using these we can
estimate nominal wages, the prices of consumption goods, and thus real
wages for England back to 1209. (To set this date in context, 1209 fell within
the reign of the famously “bad” King John, just six years before he was forced
by the barons to codify their rights in the Magna Carta of 1215.)

Figure 3.1 shows the real day wage of building laborers and farm laborers
in England by decade from 1209 to 1809 as an index, with 1800–09, at the end
of the Malthusian era, set at 100 for farm laborers. The real wage is just a
measure of how many units of a standard bundle of goods these laborers
could buy with one day’s earnings through these sixty decades.3

The composition of that bundle of goods is shown in table 3.1. It was de-
termined by expenditure studies for farm workers and others in the 1790s, a
decade in which the poverty of these workers had become an issue, in part be-
cause of the growing burden of the Poor Laws.4 These studies revealed that
even around 1800 English farm workers spent three-quarters of their income
on food, with starches such as bread accounting for the bulk of that expendi-
ture at 44 percent of the entire budget. The other quarter of their expenditures

3. These real wages are drawn from the series derived in Clark, 2005, and Clark, 2007a.
These series are the most comprehensive measures available for living standards in any pre-
industrial economy, including goods whose prices are typically not measurable, such as housing.

4. Clark, Huberman, and Lindert, 1995; Clark, 2001b.

lv G STA a R s   4


Table 3. Expenditure Shares of
Laborers before 1800

Category of

expenditure         Share (%)

Food and drink         75

Grains and starches      44

Dairy             10

Meat             9

Drink             8

Sugar and honey        3

Salt and pepper        1

Clothing and bedding     10

Housing             6

Heating             5

Light and soap          4

was devoted to the basics of shelter, heating, light and soap, and clothing and
bedding. This despite the fact that by the 1790s English workers earned more
than workers in most other European economies, and also significantly more,
as we shall see, than workers in China, India, or Japan.

Real wages in England showed remarkably little gain in the six hundred
years from 1200 to 1800. The fluctuations over that period are much more
dramatic than any long-run upward trend. Thus in thirty-nine of the sixty
decades between 1200 and 1800 real wages for farm workers are estimated to
be above their level in 1800. The highest real wages are found in the interval
1400–1549, long before 1800. The years around 1300, before the onset of the
plague  in England in 1349, do show lower wages than in 1800. But wages in
the early thirteenth century are close to their level in 1800.

It should be stressed that this wage index incorporates the arrival of new
goods such as sugar, pepper, raisins, tea, coffee, and tobacco. Even allowing
for the gains in real income from the decline in prices of all these new goods
in the years 1500–1800, workers in the late Middle Ages were still much
richer. They received extra rations of beef and beer as part of their wages,
which more than covered any absence of tea or sugar.

The English experience also shows that, while the Malthusian economy
displayed stagnant material living standards, these were not necessarily low

42  chat R 3


Table 3.2

Wages and Prices in Malawi, 2001–2002, and England, 1800

England,          Malawi,

England,    1800    Malawi,   2001–02

1800    (units    2001–02    (units
(pence)    per day)   (kwacha)   per day)

Wage             23.9      —       69      —

Prices

Flour (kilograms)       7.5      3.2      33      2.1

Bread (kilograms)       5.9      4.0      46      1.5

Potatoes (kilograms)     1.2     20.4      16      4.2

Beef (kilograms)       17.4      1.4      123      0.6

Eggs (dozen)        11.1      2.1      84      0.8

Milk (liters)         2.4      9.9      48      1.4

Sugar (kilograms)      26.3      0.9      42      1.7

Beer (liters)          4.1      5.8      93      0.7

Tea (kilograms)      219.5      0.1      248      0.3

Salt (kilograms)        9.1      2.6      24      2.8

Cost of English basket     23.9      1.0      178      0.4

Sources: England: Clark, 2007b. Malawi: International Labour Organization, Bureau of
Statistics, 2006a.

standards of living, even by the measure of many modern economies. Though
the consumption pattern of the preindustrial English worker around 1800
may seem primitive, it actually implies, from the shares devoted to different
goods, high living standards by the measure of the modern Third World.
Over 40 percent of the food consumption, for example, was for luxury goods
like meats, milk, cheese, butter, beer, sugar, and tea (see table 3.1). All of these
are very expensive sources for the calories and proteins necessary to work and
to maintaining the body. Very poor people do not buy such goods.

The comparative affluence of the preindustrial worker in England can be
illustrated in two ways. First we can compare the day wages of English farm
workers and construction laborers before 1800 with those of some of the poorer
countries of the current world.5 Table 3.2 shows the wages of construction

5. These data are not so easy to obtain as might be assumed, since modern poor coun-
tries tend to have poor bureaucracies for gathering statistics.

lv G STA a R s   43


laborers in Malawi in 2001–02, compared with the prices of some major items
of consumption, along with the comparative data for construction laborers in
England in 1800.

Only food prices are available for Malawi, but since these were 75 percent
of English farm workers’ expenditures they provide a fair approximation of
living standards. The second column shows the day wage in England as well as
prices in England. The fourth column gives the same data for Malawi in 2001–

02. Columns 3 and 5 show how much of each item could be purchased with
the day wage in each country. Thus the day wage in England in 1800 would pur-
chase 3.2 kilograms of wheat flour, while the day wage in Malawi would
purchase only 2.1 kilograms of inferior maize flour.

English workers of 1800 could purchase much more of most goods than
their Malawian counterparts. The last row shows the cost of the English bas-
ket of foods in pence (assuming that all income was spent on food) and the
equivalent cost in Malawian kwacha. If a Malawian had tried to purchase the
consumption of the English worker in 1800 he would have been able to afford
only   40 percent as much. Thus living standards in England in 1800 were pos-
sibly 2.5 times greater than those of current-day Malawi. Figure 3.2 shows a
contemporary rural village in Malawi. Yet the meager wage in Malawi is still
above   the subsistence level for that economy in healthy modern conditions,
since the Malawian population continues to grow rapidly.

For a much wider range of countries we have estimates of real national
income per person in 2000. It is also possible to estimate national income per
person for England back to 1200, so we can compare average income per per-
son in preindustrial England with the range in the modern world. Table 3.3
shows the results of that comparison. England in 1200–1800 had an income
per person as high as, or higher than, large areas of the modern world. Coun-
tries with an aggregate population of more than 700 million people in the
year 2000 had incomes below the average of preindustrial England. Another
billion people in India had average incomes only 10 percent above those in
England before the Industrial Revolution. Some modern countries are dramat-
ically poorer. Hundreds of millions of Africans now live on less than 40 per-
cent of the income of preindustrial England.

The reductions in mortality from modern vaccines, antibiotics, and pub-
lic health measures in these poor countries since 1950 have been rightly cele-
brated as a significant triumph of international aid efforts. Life expectancy

44  chat R 3


Figure 3.2 A rural village in Malawi, 1988.

was 40 in developing countries in 1950, but it had reached 65 by 2000.6 Table

3.3 also shows modern life expectancies, which are much higher at a given
income than in the preindustrial world. One side effect of these advances,
however, has been that, even at wages well below those of preindustrial
England, population in these countries is still growing with a rapidity never
seen  in the preindustrial world, as table 3.3 also shows. The subsistence wage,
at which population growth would cease, is many times lower in the modern
world than in the preindustrial period. This is one factor leading to the Great
Divergence in incomes discussed in the last section of the book. Given the con-
tinued heavy dependence of many sub-Saharan African countries on farming,
and a fixed supply of agricultural land, health care improvements are not an
unmitigated blessing, but exact a cost in terms of lower material incomes.

In recent years the ravages of AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa have also, de-
spite modern medical technologies, reduced life expectancy in some of these
countries to levels that are little above those in the preindustrial world (as we
shall  see from table 5.2). Not only is Malawi dramatically poorer in material

6. Levine et al., 2004, 9.

lv G STA a R s   45


Table 3.3 Comparative Incomes per Person, 2000

Income      Population   Life
Population,   per   Relative  growth  expectancy

2000    person  income    rate    at birth,
Country       (millions)  (2005 $)   (%)     (%)     2003

Tanzania         34     569    20     2.1      46

Burundi          7     717    25     2.9      44

Ethiopia         64     832    29     2.3      48

Sierra Leone        5     849    30     2.3      41

Malawi          10     935    33     2.4      40

Nigeria         127     956    34     2.4      43

Zambia          10     972    34     2.1      38

Madagascar        16    1,014    36     3.0      55

Rwanda          9    1,129    40     2.4      44

Burkina Faso       11    1,141    40     3.0      48

Mali           11    1,150    41     2.3      48

Benin           6    1,417    50     2.7      54

Kenya           30    1,525    54     2.6      47

Ghana          19    1,590    56     2.1      57

Nepal           23    1,809    64     2.2      62

Senegal          10    1,945    69     2.3      56

Bangladesh        131    2,052    73     2.2      63

Nicaragua         5    2,254    80     2.0      70

Côte d’Ivoire       16    2,345    83     2.0      46

Pakistan         138    2,497    88     2.2      63

Honduras         6    2,505    89     2.3      68

Moldova          4    2,559    90     0.3      68

Cameroon        15    2,662    94     2.0      46

England pre-1800    —    2,828    100     0.1      37

Zimbabwe         13    3,016    107     0.6      37

India          1,016    3,103    110     1.4      63

Bolivia           8    3,391    120     1.6      64

China         1,259    4,446    157     0.6      72

Sources: Income: Heston et al., 2006. Population: United Nations, 2006. Life expectancy:
preindustrial England, table 5.2; others, United Nations, Development Program, 2005,
220–22.


250

200

North/Central Italy

150


100

50

England

Netherlands

0

1250   1350   1450   1550   1650   1750

Figure 3.3 Comparative European real wages, 1250–1809. Northern and cen-
tral Italian wages are from Federico and Malanima, 2004, appendix. Dutch
wages are from de Vries and van der Woude, 1997, 609–28. The relative level
of these wages to those in England in 1800 was fixed by assuming wages were
proportionate to real GDP per person in each country relative to England in
1910   and 1810 respectively.

terms than preindustrial England, it also has a life expectancy barely above
that of England before 1800: 40 versus 37. Indeed, given the patterns of mor-
tality in sub-Saharan Africa, life expectancy at age 20 is lower in Malawi than
it was in preindustrial England.

This information on English living standards before 1800 illustrates that
within any society under the Malthusian constraints wages and living stan-
dards can fluctuate by large amounts. Societies subject to Malthusian con-
straints were not necessarily particularly poor, even by the standard of today.

Figure 3.3 shows long-run real English builders’ day wages in comparison
to those in northern and central Italy and those in the Netherlands. Wages in
both Italy and the Netherlands were significantly higher in the years before
1800 than in 1800 itself. They were also typically even higher than wages in
England. Again there is no secular increase in real wages.

Information on real wages for societies earlier than 1200 is more frag-
mentary. But table 3.4 shows a very simple measure of wages, the equivalent
of  the wage in pounds of wheat, for unskilled laborers in a variety of earlier
societies all the way back to ancient Babylonia in the second millennium be-

lv G STA a R s   47


Table 3.4 Laborers’ Wages in Wheat Equivalents

Day wage

Location            Period       (pounds of wheat)

Ancient Babyloniaa     1800–1600 BC        15*

Assyriab            1500–1350 BC        10*

Neo-Babyloniaa        900–400 BC          9*

Classical Athensc       408 BC           30

328 BC           24

Roman Egyptd        c. AD 250           8*

Englande,f           1780–1800          13

1780–1800         11*

Sources: aPowell, 1990, 98; Farber, 1978, 50–51. bZaccagnini, 1988, 48. cJevons,

1895, 1896. dRathbone, 1991, 156–58, 464–45. eClark, 2005. fClark, 2001b.

Note: * denotes farm wage.

fore Christ. Wages on this same wheat basis are shown for England over the
period 1780–1800. There is considerable variation in these earlier wages, but
they are easily as high as in England on the eve of the Industrial Revolution,
even those three thousand years before this.

Table 3.5 shows in the same terms wheat wages around the world in the
late eighteenth century. Two things stand out. First is the great range of wage
levels around 1800, of the order of 4 or 5 to 1. These variations, in the Malthu-
sian framework, should have no relation to the technological sophistication of
the society, and should instead be explained by differences in fertility and
mortality conditions across societies. The wage quotes from 1780–1800 do seem
to confirm that technological sophistication is not the determinant of wages.
English wages, for example, are above average in the table, but not any higher
than for such technological backwaters of 1800 as Istanbul, Cairo, and War-
saw.7 English wages in 1800 on average were about the same as those for ancient
Babylon and Assyria, despite the great technological gains of the intervening
thousands of years. In the next two chapters we will ask whether fertility and

7. The limitations of the grain wage as a measure are, however, revealed in the compari-
son to Poland. Grain was the great export crop of eastern Europe and was much cheaper there
than elsewhere in Europe. A more comprehensive wage measure would show lower eastern Eu-
ropean wages.

48  chat R 3


Table 3.5 Laborer’s Wages in Wheat Equivalents, circa 1800

Day wage

Location            Period      (pounds of wheat)

Amsterdama           1780–1800       21

Istanbulb             1780–1800       18

Londonc             1780–1800       16

Antwerpa             1780–1800       16

Cairob              1780–1800        15

Englandc             1780–1800       13

Warsawa             1780–96         13

Leipziga             1780–1800       13

Danzig (Gdansk)a        1780–1800       11

Englandd             1780–1800       11*

Viennaa              1780–1800       10

Parise               1780–1800       10

Madrida             1780–99         9.0

Naplesa              1780–1800        7.6

Valenciaa             1780–85         6.8

China (Yangzi Delta)f      1750–1849        6.6*◊

Koreag              1780–99         6.0◊

Milana              1780–1800        5.6

South Indiaf           1750–90         5.1◊

Japan (Kyoto)h          1791–1800        4.5◊

Sources: aAllen, 2001, 411, note 1. bPamuk, 2005, 224. cClark, 2005. dClark,

2001b. eVan Zanden, 1999, 181–85. fBroadberry and Gupta, 2006, 17, 19. gHo

and Lewis, 2006, 229. hBassino and Ma, 2005, appendix table 1, assuming 45

pounds of wheat flour per 60 pounds of wheat.

Note: Silver wages in Europe 1780–1800 were deflated by the wheat prices in
the Allen-Unger data set. * denotes farm wage. ◊ denotes the wheat equivalent
of the rice wage, converting by the relative calorie content of wheat and rice.

mortality conditions are consistent with these wage variations. In particular,
why were Asian societies such as Japan so poor compared to England in 1800?
The second noteworthy aspect of table 3.5 is that there is no sign of any
improvement in material conditions for settled agrarian societies as we ap-
proach 1800. There was no gain between 1800 BC and AD 1800—a period of
3,600 years. Indeed the wages for east and south Asia and southern Europe
for 1800 stand out by their low level compared to those for ancient Babylonia,

lv G STA a R s   49


Table 3.6 Calories and Protein per Capita

Group            Period    Kilocalories    Grams protein
England, farm laborersa     1787–96     1,508       27.9

England, alla            1787–96      2,322        48.2

Belgium, allb            1812       2,248        —

Ache, Paraguayc          1980s       3,827        —

Hadza, Tanzaniad           —       3,300        —

Alyware, Australiad        1970s       3,000        —

Onge, Andaman Islandsd     1970s       2,620        —

Aruni, New Guineae       1966       2,390        —

!Kung, Botswanac         1960s       2,355        —

Bayano Cuna, Panamaf      1960–61     2,325        49.7

Mbuti, Congod          1970s       2,280        —

Anbarra, Australiad        1970s       2,050        —

Hiwi, Venezuelac         1980s       1,705        64.4

Shipibo, Perug           1971       1,665        65.5

Yanomamo, Brazilh        1974       1,452        58.1

Sources: aClark et al., 1995, 223–34. bBekaert, 1991, 635. cHurtado and Hill, 1987, 183; Hurtado

and Hill, 1990, 316. dJenike, 2001, 212.eWaddell, 1972, 126. fBennett, 1962, 46. gBergman,

1980, 205. hLizot, 1977, 508–12.

ancient Greece, or Roman Egypt. The evidence on preindustrial wages is con-
sistent with the Malthusian interpretation of the previous chapter.

Calories, Proteins, and Living Standards

A proxy for living standards in the distant past is the living standard of sur-
viving forager and simple agrarian societies. However, since these societies do
not have labor markets with wages, we need another metric to compare their
material conditions with those of preindustrial societies around 1800.

One such index of living standards is food consumption per person,
measured as calories or grams of protein per person per day, as shown in table

3.6. As income rises in poor societies, calorie consumption per person char-
acteristically also increases. How did calorie consumption in rich societies like
England or Belgium in 1800 compare with that in earlier societies?

The evidence we have for England is from surveys of poorer families,
mainly those of farm laborers, made in 1787–96 as part of a debate on the ris-

5  chat R 3


ing costs of the Poor Law.8 The poor consumed an average of only 1,508 kilo-
calories per day. The average income per head in these families, £4.6, how-
ever, was only about 30 percent of the average English income per person of

£15. We can estimate the average calorie consumption in England using the
relationship between calorie and protein consumption and income derived
from the survey data. This is also shown in the table.9 The value for England
as a whole is close to the average consumption calculated for Belgium in 1812.
The information we have for the likely consumption of earlier societies
comes from studies of modern forager and shifting cultivation societies. These
reveal considerable variation in calorie consumption across the groups surveyed,
ranging from a modest 1,452 kilocalories per person per day for the Yanomamo
of Brazil to a kingly 3,827 kilocalories per person per day for the Ache of
Paraguay. Some of this is undoubtedly the result of errors in measuring food
consumption. But the median is 2,340, implying that hunter-gatherers and sub-
sistence agriculturalists ate as many calories as the median person in England or
Belgium circa 1800. Primitive man ate well compared with one of the richest so-
cieties in the world in 1800. Indeed British farm laborers by 1863 had just

reached the median consumption of these forager and subsistence societies.

Furthermore, the English diet of the 1790s typically had a lower protein
content than the diets of these technologically simpler societies. Since the me-
dian forager ate as well as the English, foragers must have been eating much
better than the poorer Asian societies in terms of both calories and protein.

Variety of diet is another important component of human material wel-
fare. By 1800 the European diet had been enriched by the introduction of
spices, sugar, tea, and coffee from Asia and potatoes and tomatoes from the
New World. But for the typical European that enrichment was quite limited.
In England in 1800 the daily diet had been supplemented on average by 0.85
ounce of sugar, 0.07 ounce of tea, 0.004 ounce of coffee, and 0.05 ounce of
tobacco.10 The overwhelming bulk of the diet was the traditional daily mo-
notony of bread, leavened by modest amounts of beef, mutton, cheese, and
beer. In contrast hunter-gatherer and subsistence cultivation diets were widely
varied. The diet of the Yanomamo, for example, included monkeys, wild pigs,

8. Eden, 1797.

9. Clark et al., 1995, 223–24. Since the income elasticities would fall to almost zero for
very high incomes, I assume the median consumer has an income of £12 per head.

10. Mokyr, 1988, 75.

lv G STA a R s   5


tapirs, armadillos, anteaters, alligators, jaguar, deer, rodents, a large variety of
birds, many types of insects, caterpillars, various fish, larvae, freshwater crabs,
snakes, toads, frogs, various palm fruits, palm hearts, hardwood fruits, brazil
nuts, tubers, mushrooms, plantains, manioc, maize, bananas, and honey.11

Engel’s Law and Living Standards

When the Prussian statistician Ernst Engel (1821–96)—not to be confused with
his rabble-rousing contemporary Friedrich Engels (1820–95)—undertook stud-
ies of German working-class budgets, he found a simple but powerful empiri-
cal relationship, now called Engel’s Law. The poorer a family, the larger the
share of its income that was spent on food. This relationship has been con-
firmed by numerous subsequent studies. For the poorest societies food can rep-
resent more than 80 percent or more of all expenditures, while for the richest
spending on the actual food content of meals is a mere 5–10 percent of income.

Even within the food category of expenditures, there are further variants
of the original Engel’s Law. When people are very poor, so that hunger is ever
present, they consume the cheapest forms of calories available—grains such
as wheat, rice, rye, barley, oats, or maize, and beans or potatoes—consumed
in the cheapest possible way as porridge, mush, or bread. Their diet is also ex-
tremely monotonous, with little spent on flavorings. Thus Irish farm laborers
in  the years before the famine lived on a diet that was composed almost en-
tirely of potatoes. At the lowest incomes the cheapest calorie sources account
for  a very large share of income. But as incomes increase a larger and larger
share of food consumption is devoted to more expensive calories—those pro-
vided by, for example, milk, cheese, butter, eggs, meat, fish, beer, and wine—
or to spices and drinks of no calorific value, such as pepper, tea, and coffee.

For the ordinary people of the poorest societies meat seems to have been
the preeminent luxury item. It was reported, for example, that the Sha-
ranahua foragers of eastern Peru “are continually preoccupied with the topic
of meat, and men, women and children spend an inordinate amount of time
talking about meat, planning visits to households that have meat, and lying
about the meat they have in their households.” In this and a number of
other forager societies meat would be traded by hunters for sexual favors

11. Chagnon, 1983, 57–58. In addition Yanomamo men were daily consumers of tobacco
and a hallucinogenic snuff.

52  chat R 3


Meat

Starches

Real income

Figure 3.4 Engel curves.

from women. “The successful hunter is usually the winner in the competition
for women.”12

These consumption patterns can be portrayed using Engel curves, as in
figure 3.4. An Engel curve shows how consumption of any good changes with
income, with the implicit assumption that relative prices are kept constant.
Goods such as food, called necessities, account for a much larger share of the
consumption of poor people than of rich people. Indeed for many of these
goods,  such as basic starches, as income increases the absolute amount spent
on the good will decline. Other goods are luxuries. Their share in consump-
tion expenditure rises with income, at least for some range of incomes.

Differences in relative prices can induce deviations from the regularity
of Engel’s Law, but a good general index of living standards is thus either the
share of income spent on food or the share of the food budget spent on basic
starches as opposed to meats, alcohol, and refined sugars.

Table 3.7 shows the shares of food expenditures devoted to these cate-
gories for farm laborers in England in the 1790s. With only 61 percent of their
food expenditures devoted to basic starches these workers reveal themselves to
be living well, even compared to Indian farm laborers circa 1950. They also
seem to have been much better off than Japanese laborers in the eighteenth
century. For England we have evidence on the consumption patterns of agri-
cultural workers back to the thirteenth century because of the custom of feed-
ing harvest workers. The diets of those workers from 1250 to 1449 imply an

12. Siskind, 1973, 84, 95–96.

lv G STA a R s   53


Table 3.7 Share of Different Products in Food Consumption of Farm Workers

Cereals          Animal

and          products,

pulses    Sugar     fats     Alcohol
Location    Period     (%)     (%)     (%)     (%)

Englanda     1250–99    48.0     0.0      40.2      11.8

1300–49    39.7     0.0      43.0      17.0

1350–99    20.8     0.0      55.3      24.0

1400–49    18.3     0.0      46.4      34.3

Englandb     1787–96    60.6     4.7      28.4      1.3

Japanc      ca. 1750     95.4     0.0      4.6      0.0

Indiad      1950      83.3     1.6      5.4      0.8

Sources: aDyer, 1988. bClark et al., 1995. cBassino and Ma, 2005. dGovernment of India, Min-
istry of Labour, 1954, 114, 118.

even higher standard of living for earlier centuries than for England in the
1790s. After the onset of the Black Death in 1348, which caused real wages to
rise, harvest workers were fed a diet in which basic grains accounted for only
about 20 percent of the cost. The rest was made up of dairy products, fish,
and beer.

Engel’s Law, though a simple empirical relationship, has profound im-
portance in explaining world history. In the Malthusian era incomes were
bound to remain low, and so food dominated expenditures. Apart from the
effect this may have had on conversation, the high share of food expenditures
before 1800 ensured that these early societies were largely dispersed and agrar-
ian. If 80 percent of income in the preindustrial world was spent on food,
then 80 percent of the population was employed in agriculture, fishing, or
hunting.13 Agricultural production also demanded a population that lived
close to the fields, so preindustrial societies were rural, with small urban pop-
ulations. The average parish in England in 1450 would have had 220 residents.14
Unlike the situation in modern high-income economies, people would rarely
encounter strangers.

13. This conclusion would not necessarily hold once countries began trading substantial
quantities of foodstuffs. But such extensive trade was rare before 1800.

14. Assuming a population of 2.2 million from Clark, 2007a, and the same number of
parishes as reported in the 1801 census.

54  chat R 3


If the great majority of income was spent on food then there was also
little surplus for producing “culture” in terms of buildings, clothing, objects,
entertainments, and spectacles. As long as the Malthusian Trap dominated,
the    great priority of all societies was food production.

But the link between consumption and production implies that another
index of living standards, at least for societies in which trade possibilities were
limited, was the proportion of the population engaged in agriculture. Again
the comparative prosperity of early England shows up in the high shares of
the population, even at early dates, occupied outside the agricultural sector,
in areas such as clothing production or building. Thus in the county of Suf-
folk in England in 1620–35 only 63 percent of male testators were engaged in
farming or fishing.15 In comparison in Tanzania in 2000 83 percent of males
were occupied in farming or fishing.16

Human Stature and Material Living Standards

Information on real day wages, food consumption, or occupations is available
for only a small share of preindustrial societies. Wage labor was absent from
very early societies, and later ones with labor markets have often left no
records. To measure living standards for most of the preindustrial era we must
resort to more indirect measures. One such index is average heights. The most
obvious effect of better material living standards is to make people taller. If
you travel even today to a poor country, such as India, you will immediately
be struck by how short people are. Average heights of young males in rich
contemporary societies of predominantly European origin are in the range
177–183 centimeters (70–72 inches). Young African-American males have an
average height of 178 centimeters.17 In contrast males in southern India in
1988–90 had an average height of only 164 centimeters (64.4 inches), a full
19 centimeters shorter than young Dutch males.18 Poorer groups within mod-
ern India have even smaller heights. A group of tea plantation workers in West
Bengal in 1994 had an average height of 161 centimeters.19 Similarly males in

15. Evans, 1987; Allen, 1989.

16. International Labour Organization, Bureau of Statistics, 2006b.

17. United States heights from Ogden et al., 2004, table 14.

18. Brennan et al., 1997, 220. The states surveyed were Andhra, Karnataka, Kerala, Pradesh,
and Tamil Nadu. Males were aged 25–39.

19. Roy, 1995, 695.

lv G STA a R s   55


Figure 3.5 American traveler with Malawian porters, 2001.

rural Malawi in 1987 had an average height of 165 centimeters, 13 centimeters
shorter than young African-American males in the United States.20 Figure 3.5
illustrates the height gap between modern Americans and Malawians.

There is little sign in modern populations of any genetically determined
differences in potential stature, except for some rare groups such as the pyg-
mies  of central Africa. Diet, however, does seem to influence height. Young
men in rich East Asian countries are not so tall as in Europe (only 171 centi-
meters in Japan), probably because of dietary differences. But within societies
the positive correlation between health and height is well documented.21
Stature is determined by both childhood nutrition and the incidence of child-
hood illness. Episodes of ill health during growth phases can stop growth, and
the body catches up only partially later on. But both nutrition and the inci-
dence of illness depend on material living conditions.

There is evidence on the stature of the living from only a few preindus-
trial societies, and then typically not for much earlier than 1800. But through

20. Pelletier et al., 1991, 356.

21. Steckel, 1995.

56  chat R 3


Table 3.8 Estimated Average Height of Adult Males in Preindustrial Societies

Height

Period    Location         Type         Ages   (centimeters)

1830s     Swedena           Soldiers        Adult    172

1710–59*   Englandb          Convicts       23–60    171

Indentured servants  23–60   171

1830s     Englanda           Soldiers        Adult    169

Northern Italya       Soldiers       25–40    167

Bavariaa           Soldiers       Adult    167

Francea            Soldiers       Adult    167

Netherlandsa        Soldiers       Adult    167

1770–1815  Englandc          Convicts       23–49    166

1830s    Hungarya          Soldiers       Adult    166

Austriaa           Soldiers       Adult    164

1819–39   West Africa (Yoruba)d   Slaves        25–40    167

Mozambiqued        Slaves        25–40    165

West Africa (Igbo)d     Slaves        25–40    163

1800–29*  Southern Chinae      Convicts       23–59    164

1843     Southern Indiaf       Indentured servants  24–40    163

1842–44   Northern India (Bihar)f  Indentured servants  24–40    161

1883–92   Japang            Soldiers       20      159

Sources: aA’Hearn, 2003, table 3. Adjusted to adult heights. bKomlos, 1993, 775. cBrennan et al.,

1997, 220. dEltis, 1982, 459–60. Slaves freed from ships transporting them. eMorgan, 2006, table 
4a.

fNicholas and Steckel, 1991, 946. gYasuba, 1986, 223. Adjusted from age 20 to adult heights.

Note: * denotes birth years.

measurement of the long bones in skeletal remains we can get evidence on the
stature of a much earlier set of preindustrial societies.

Table 3.8 shows a summary of this evidence on the stature of living males
for the years around 1800 for a range of countries, given in order of average
height. The heights were drawn from a variety of populations: soldiers, convicts,
freed slaves, and indentured servants. Indian heights in 1843, for example, are
those of indentured servants recruited for labor in Mauritius. But since these In-
dian workers were being selected for heavy manual labor abroad, there is no rea-
son to expect they were smaller than the general population. These Indian in-
dentured servants were significantly smaller than indentured servants recruited
in England for service in North America in the eighteenth century. Similarly the

lv G STA a R s   57


Chinese heights are for immigrants to Australia who were later imprisoned. But
their heights were significantly less than those of eighteenth-century English
convicts transported to America or Australia. The African heights are those of
slaves freed en route to the Americas by British ships. Again there would be
countervailing biases suggesting that they would be representative of the general
population. Slaves would be expected to be poorer than average and thus
smaller, but those shipped to plantation work in the New World would have
been selected for strength and health, given the cost of transporting them.

Clearly at the onset of the Industrial Revolution the heights of European
males were intermediate between those of males in the modern United States
and Europe and those of modern India and Africa. Malthus himself, from his
time as a country parson, knew that living conditions for the laboring classes
in England around 1800 were poor enough that they resulted in stunting: “It
cannot fail to be remarked by those who live much in the country, that the sons
of labourers are very apt to be stunted in their growth, and are a long while
arriving at maturity.”22

Heights in preindustrial Asia seem to have been generally much lower
than those in preindustrial Europe. As noted previously, dietary differences
may explain some of this variation. But the gain of 12 centimeters in height
for Japanese between the preindustrial world and today is greater than the gain
of about 7 centimeters in England, suggesting that, even allowing for diet, pre-
industrial Japan was poorer than preindustrial England. At 165 centimeters,
heights for Africa, despite the presumably inferior technology there, were not
far below the European average.

In tropical Africa, nature itself supplied high material living standards
through high death rates from disease. For Europeans—and indeed almost
as much so for native Africans—tropical Africa was deadly. Half of British
troops stationed on the coast of West Africa in the eighteenth century died in
their first year in station.23 When the journalist Henry Morton Stanley made
his famous journeys across equatorial Africa in the late nineteenth century,
what allowed him to make his discoveries was not any particular skill with
guns or languages, but his ability to withstand the many illnesses that killed
all of his white companions.

22. Malthus, 1798, 94.

23. Black Americans who colonized Liberia after 1823 also had extraordinarily high death
rates, suggesting that Africans had little genetic protection against the disease environment;
McDaniel, 1992.

58  chat R 3


Table 3.9 Heights of Adult Males in Modern Foraging and Subsistence Societies

Height

Period  Group           Location     Ages   (centimeters)

1892   Plains Indiansa         United States   23–49    172

1970s   Anbarrab             Australia      Adults    172*
Rembarrangac          Australia      Adults    171*

1910   Alaskan Inuitd         United States   Adults    170*

1890   Northern Pacific Indianse   United States   Adults    167*
1944   Sandawef           Tanzania     Adults    167*

1891   Shoshonag           United States   20–59    166

1970s   Fox Basin Inuitc         Canada      Adults     166*
1880s   Solomon Islandersh       Solomon Is.    Adults     165*
1906   Canadian Inuitd         Canada      Adults     164*
1969   !Kungi              Bostwana     21–40     163

1980s   Achej              Paraguay      Adults    163*

1970s   Hadzac             Tanzania      Adults    163*

1985   Hiwij              Venezuela     Adults    156*

1980s   Batakc              Philippines    Adults    155*

Agtac              Philippines    Adults    155*

Akac               Central African  Adults    155*
Republic

Sources: aSteckel and Prince, 2001. bKelly, 1995, 102. cJenike, 2001, 223. dHawkes, 1916, 207.

eBoaz, 1891, 327. f Trevor, 1947, 69. gBoaz, 1899, 751. hGuppy, 1886, 267. iTruswell and

Hansen, 1976, 172. jHurtado and Hill, 1987, 180–82.

Notes: * denotes heights adjusted to ages 21–40. The heights of all !Kung males averaged

2 centimeters less than those aged 21–40.

How do these heights at the end of the preindustrial era compare with
those in earlier societies? As a guide to likely living conditions before the ar-
rival of settled agriculture we have average heights for modern foraging soci-
eties. Franz Boas in particular collected height observations from hundreds of
Native American tribes in the late nineteenth century. As table 3.9 shows, the
range of variation is similar to that in agrarian societies around 1800. Some
hunter-gatherers were significantly taller than the nineteenth-century Chi-
nese,  Indians, and Japanese, and many Europeans. The median of the heights
for these forager societies is 165 centimeters, very little less than that in Europe
in 1800 and significantly above that in Asia circa 1800.

lv G STA a R s   59


180


176

172

USA, native born


168

164

Skeletal remains, Europe

Sweden

160

0  200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000

Figure 3.6 Male heights from skeletons in Europe, AD 1–2000. Data from
Steckel, 2001, figures 3 and 4, and Koepke and Baten, 2005.

The Tahitians of the 1760s, still in the stone age, seem to have been as tall,
or taller, than their English visitors with all their marvelous European technol-
ogy. The explorers certainly thought them tall, remarkably enough that Joseph
Banks, a scientist on the Endeavour expedition of 1769, measured the height
of  a particularly tall Tahitian at 75.5 inches (192 centimeters). In England in
1800 only one adult male in 2,500 would measure 192 centimeters or more.24
Since he likely saw only a few hundred adult males, given the brevity of his
stay and the low population densities of Tahiti, average heights in Tahiti were
with strong probability greater than those in eighteenth-century England.

Thus the thousands of years of advance representing the difference be-
tween forager technology and that of agrarian societies around 1800 did not
lead to any signs of a systematic improvement in material living conditions.
To look at living conditions in the actual historical past, as opposed to
equivalent contemporary societies, we can use male heights inferred from
skeletal remains. Figure 3.6 summarizes the published evidence available on
average heights from skeletal remains in Europe from AD 1 to 1800, normal-
ized to male heights. The century-long averages summarize data from 9,477
sets of remains. There is no trend before 1800. Also shown for comparison are

24. Banks, 1962, 334. The height range in England is calculated assuming the standard
deviation of heights was the same as in modern Britain.

6  chat R 3


Table 3. Heights from Skeletal Remains by Period

Height

Period         Location        Observations   (centimeters)

Mesolithica        Europe             82       168

Neolithica,b        Europe            190       167

Denmark           103       173

1600–1800c        Holland            143       167

1700–1800c        Norway           1,956       165

1700–1850c        London            211       170

Pre-Dynasticd       Egypt              60       165

Dynasticd         Egypt             126       166

2500 BCe         Turkey             72       166

1700 BCf         Lerna, Greece          42       166

2000–1000 BCg     Harappa, India        —        169

300 BC–AD 250h    Japan (Yayoi)         151       161

1200–1600h       Japan (medieval)        20       159

1603–1867h       Japan (Edo)          36       158

1450i           Marianas, Taumako       70       174

1650i           Easter Island          14       173

1500–1750i        New Zealand         124       174

1400–1800i        Hawaii            —        173

Sources: aMeiklejohn and Zvelebil, 1991, 133. bBennike, 1985, 51–52. cSteckel, 2001. dMasali,

1972. eMellink and Angel, 1970. fAngel, 1971. gHoughton, 1996, 43–45. hBoix and Rosenbluth,

2004, table 6. iDutta, 1984.

the heights of male conscripts by birth year for Sweden from 1820 on, and the
heights of native-born U.S. males from 1710 on. The gains in income after
1800 show up clearly in the heights of the living.

Table 3.10 shows average male stature measured from skeletal collections
from a broad range of preindustrial locations before 1800, back as far as the
European Mesolithic (8000–5000 BC). The small size of many of these col-
lections, their potentially unrepresentative economic status, and the errors in
inferring stature from the lengths of long bones all imply large potential errors
in inferring specific population heights from these samples. But the overall
pattern is clear. In Europe, India, and Japan heights in the earlier millennia
were as great or greater than those of 1800. In particular heights in the European

lv G STA a R s   6


Mesolithic and Neolithic were slightly greater than even those of England
and the Netherlands, the richest societies in the world in 1800.

Heights, and hence by implication living standards, did fluctuate some-
what before 1800. But the variations, as predicted in the Malthusian model,
have no connection with technological advances.

Thus Europeans in parts of the medieval period seem to have been taller
than those in the classical period, or in the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries. Polynesians in the period before contact with the outside world
were also tall by preindustrial standards, according well with the inference
drawn above from the report by Banks. Yet there is no doubt that the tech-
nology of the Polynesians was far behind that of the Europeans. Polynesia was
still  a Neolithic economy without metals. Fishhooks were laboriously fash-
ioned from bone or coral. The preferred weapon of war was a wooden club.
Canoes had to be made from tree trunks using fire and stone axes. The canoes
were sometimes fitted with sails, but these were not rigged in such a way that
they could sail into the wind. Thus long ocean voyages were hazardous. There
was little or no earthenware. There was no system of writing. Cloth was made
from tree bark, but little clothing was required in the equatorial climate.

The natural environment of Polynesia was benign. The scourge of the
tropics, malaria, did not exist on the islands until it was imported, along with
the mosquito, by white mariners. Thus the British and French crews spent
months ashore in Polynesia with few if any deaths from local diseases. But
where nature failed them, the Polynesians seem to have supplied their own
mortality. The reason for their high living standards, as we shall see in chap-
ter   5, seems to have been high death rates from infanticide, internal warfare,
and human sacrifice. Polynesia was paradise for the living—but a paradise
with a cost.

The Industrious Revolution

Consideration of early forager societies through skeletons, and of contempo-
rary remnant forager societies, suggests that material living conditions were if
anything better for these societies than for the settled agrarian societies on the
eve  of the Industrial Revolution.

But another dimension of living conditions was how long people had to
labor to earn their daily bread, and the types of labor they performed. Here the
advent of settled agrarian societies probably reduced human welfare. A world

62  chat R 3


Table 3. Work Hours per Day of
English Builders

Period      Towns    Hours

1720–39      1      10.4

1740–59      1       8.3

1760–79      1      11.0

1780–99      2      11.1

1800–19      5      10.4

1820–39      9      10.1

1840–59      10      10.0

1860–69      8      10.0

Source: Clark, 2005.

of leisure for the original foragers had given way to a world of continuous
labor by the eve of the Industrial Revolution. Not only was this labor con-
tinuous, it was also much more monotonous than the tasks of the foragers.
But this change in the quantity and quality of work long preceded the arrival
of modern technology.

In England on the eve of the Industrial Revolution the typical male
worked 10 or more hours per day for 300 or more days per year, for a total an-
nual labor input in excess of 3,000 hours. For building workers we know the
length of the typical work day from the fact that employers charged for their
services both by the hour and by the day. The ratio of daily to hourly wages
suggests the typical hours per day. Table 3.11 shows this evidence. Average
daily hours of paid labor for these workers over every day of the year would
be over 8 per day. Agricultural workers seem to have had similarly long hours
per year. Comparing the wages paid to workers hired by the day with those
paid to workers hired for the year suggests that annual workers were putting
in a full 300-day year.25 Workers were kept in employment throughout the
winter with such tasks as hand threshing of grains, ditching, hedging, and
mixing and spreading manure.

Hans-Joachim Voth, in an interesting study of time use in Industrial Rev-
olution England, used summaries of witness statements in criminal trials (which

25. Clark and van der Werf, 1998.

lv G STA a R s   63


Table 3.2 Male Labor Hours per Day

Group or location       Group or activity              Hours

Tatuyoa              Shifting cultivation, hunting         7.6

Mikeab              Shifting cultivation, foraging         7.4

Achec               Hunting                   6.9

Abelamd              Subsistence agriculture, hunting       6.5

!Kunge               Foraging                   6.4

Machiguengaf          Shifting cultivation, foraging, hunting     6.0

Xavanteg              Shifting cultivation, hunting         5.9

Arunih               Subsistence agriculture            5.2

Mekranotig            Shifting cultivation, foraging, hunting     3.9

Shipiboi              Subsistence agriculture, fishing        3.4

Bembaj              Shifting cultivation, hunting         3.4

Hiwik               Hunting                   3.0

Yanomamoa           Shifting cultivation, foraging, hunting     2.8

Median                                 5.9

Britain, 1800l,m         Farm laborers, paid labor          8.2

Building workers, paid labor         8.2

London, 1800n          All workers, paid labor            9.1

United Kingdom, 2000o     All workers aged 16–64           8.8

Sources: aLizot, 1977, 514 (food only). bTucker, 2001, 183. cKaplan and Hill, 1992. dScaglion,

1986, 541. eGross, 1984, 526. fJohnson, 1975. gWerner et al., 1979, 311 (food only). hWaddell,

1972, 101. iBergman, 1980, 209. jMinge-Klevana, 1980. kHurtado and Hill, 1987, 178–79.
lClark and van der Werf, 1998. mClark, 2005, 1322. nVoth, 2001. oUnited Kingdom, Office
of National Statistics, 2003.

often contain statements of what the witness did for a living) to estimate
annual work hours in 1760, 1800, and 1830. His results for London, for which
the information is most complete, are shown in table 3.12. They suggest that
men in London in 1800 worked 9.1 hours per day.26 Thus a labor input of
8–9 hours per day of the year, for paid labor alone, seems to have been the
norm in England by 1800.

To put these work efforts into context, time studies that include study,
housework, child care, personal care, shopping, and commuting suggest that

26. Voth, 2001, 1074.

64  chat R 3


modern adult males (aged 16–64) in the United Kingdom engage in 3,200
hours of labor per year (8.8 hours per day). Thus work efforts in England by
1800 had reached modern levels.

The term Industrious Revolution was coined by Jan de Vries, who argued

that the high labor hours of Industrial Revolution England were a new phe-
nomenon, caused by the wider variety of available consumption goods.27
Voth, in support, finds evidence that work hours in London were much lower
in 1760. However, the summary of building workers’ hours in table 3.11 shows
no evidence of any rise in the length of the work day in the eighteenth cen-
tury. Evidence from the English farm sector suggests a much slower and less
dramatic increase in hours. Hours in agriculture were already high by 1770.28
Despite popular images of the Industrial Revolution sentencing formerly
happy peasants to a life of unrelenting labor in gloomy factories, this tran-
sition seems to have occurred significantly before the Industrial Revolution
rather than as a result of it.

Anthropologists have long debated how much work people had to do to
achieve subsistence in preindustrial societies.29 The anthropological tradition
prior to the 1960s assumed that hunter-gatherers lead hard lives of constant
struggle to eke out a living. The Neolithic agricultural revolution, by increas-
ing labor productivity in food production, reduced the time needed to attain
subsistence, thus allowing for leisure, craft production, religious ceremonies,
and other cultural expressions.

However, systematic time allocation studies of hunter-gatherer and sub-
sistence cultivation groups undertaken from the 1960s onward revealed labor
inputs in these societies to be surprisingly small. For example, the Hiwi, a for-
aging group from Venezuela, consumed a modest 1,705 kilocalories per day
and often complained of hunger. Yet men would generally forage for less than
2 hours per day, even with high returns from each hour of work.30

Indeed work time in these societies is considerably less than that in set-
tled agrarian societies. Table 3.12 also shows estimates of the total work input
of males per day in modern societies in which foraging and hunting were still
significant activities. For these societies median hours of work per day for males,

27. De Vries, 1994.

28. Clark and van der Werf, 1998.

29. See, for example, Gross, 1984.

30. Hurtado and Hill, 1987, 1990.

lv G STA a R s   65


including food preparation and child care, were just 5.9, or 2,150 hours per
year. Thus males in these subsistence societies consume 1,000 hours more
leisure per year than in affluent modern Europe.

Such low work inputs need not be maladaptive for foragers. Ecologists
have calculated for how many hours a day various bird and mammal species
engage in “work”—foraging, moving, defending territory, or even socializing—
as opposed to resting. If we take the just species closest to man—apes and
monkeys—work hours per day averaged only 4.4.31

The typical low work effort of subsistence societies helps explain why
Polynesia appeared such an idyll to European sailors, and why Captain Blyth
had trouble getting his sailors on board again after their stay in Tahiti. The
main food supplies in Polynesia were from breadfruit trees and coconut
palms, supplemented by pig meat and fish. But all the labor that was required
for the breadfruit trees and the palms was to plant the tree, tend it until it
grew to sufficient height, and then harvest the fruits when ripe. Like the sub-
sistence societies of table 3.12 the Polynesians apparently labored little.

The Industrious Revolution and Welfare

Suppose a Malthusian economy in which workers work 2,100 hours per year
experiences an “industrious revolution” which increases labor inputs to the
3,000 hours per year typical of English workers during the Industrial Revo-
lution. What is the long-run effect of this development on living standards?
Figure 2.5, showing the effects of a technological advance in the Malthusian
era, also covers this situation. Higher labor inputs would generate higher an-
nual material output, and thus a short-run situation in which births exceeded
deaths, hence population growth. Eventually with enough population growth
the economy would again attain equilibrium, with the same annual real in-
come as before, but with workers now laboring 3,000 hours per year for this
annual wage as opposed to the previous 2,100 hours.

Indeed a community that had cultural norms which prevented people
from working more than 2,100 hours per year would be better off than one
in which people were allowed to work 3,000 hours. The prohibitions of work
on Sundays and holy days by the Catholic church, or of work on the sabbath

31. Winterhalter, 1993, 334. Chimpanzees, the hardest working of the ape and monkey
families, did work as much as modern man at 9 hours per day.

66  chat R 3


in Judaism, improved welfare in the preindustrial era. More enforced holidays
would have made living conditions even better.

In comparing forager living standards with those on the eve of the In-
dustrial Revolution we need to correct for this difference in hours. Another
way  to measure the real living standards of people in 1800 relative to those of
the predocumentary past is to consider the number of kilocalories such soci-
eties generated per hour of labor when producing their major food staples.
This is a measure of their consumption possibilities as opposed to their real-
ized consumption, which also depends on hours of work.

The surprise here is that while there is wild variation across forager and
shifting cultivation societies, many of them had food production systems
which yielded much larger numbers of calories per hour of labor than
English agriculture in 1800, at a time when labor productivity in English
agriculture was probably the highest in Europe. In 1800 the total value of
output per man-hour in English agriculture was 6.6 pence, which would buy
3,600 kilocalories of flour but only 1,800 kilocalories of fats and 1,300 kilo-
calories of meat. Assuming English farm output was then half grains, one-
quarter fats, and one-quarter meat, this implies an output of 2,600 calories per
worker-hour on average.32 Since the average person ate 2,300 kilocalories per
day  (table 3.6), each farm worker fed eleven people, so labor productivity was
very high in England.

Table 3.13 shows in comparison the energy yields of foraging and shifting
cultivation societies per worker-hour. The range in labor productivities is
huge, but the minimum average labor productivity, that for the Ache in
Paraguay, is 1,985 kilocalories per hour, not much below England in 1800. The
median yield per labor hour, 6,042 kilocalories, is more than double English
labor productivity.

Some of the reported labor productivities are astonishing, such as that for
shifting cultivation of maize by the Mikea of Madagascar. These societies,
many of them utilizing the most primitive of cultivation techniques, thus
typically had greater potential material outputs, at least in food production,
than England on the eve of the Industrial Revolution. For example, the Peru-
vian Shipibo’s staple crop, providing 80 percent of their calorie intake, was ba-
nanas cultivated in shifting patches of forest land. The technique of cultivation
was extremely simple. The land was burned and the larger trees felled. Banana

32. Clark, 2002b, tables 2 and 12.

lv G STA a R s   67


Table 3.3 Calories Produced per Worker-Hour, Forager and Shifting Cultivation
Societies versus England, 1800

Kilocalories

Group       Location    Staple foods            per hour

Mikeaa        Madagascar   Maize               110,000

Tuber foraging            1,770

Mekranotib     Brazil      Manioc, sweet potato, banana,    17,600

maize

Shipiboc       Peru      Banana, maize, beans, manioc     7,680
Xavanteb       Brazil      Rice/manioc              7,100

Machiguengad    Peru      Manioc                4,984

Kantue        Indonesia    Dry rice               4,500

Hiwif         Venezuela    Game (men)             3,735

Roots (women)           1,125

Acheg        Paraguay    Palm fiber, shoots (women)      2,630

Game (men)             1,340

England, 1800           Wheat, milk, meats          2,600

Sources: aTucker, 2001, 183. bWerner et al., 1979, 307. cBergman, 1980, 133. dJohnson, 1975.

eDove, 1984, 99. fHurtado and Hill, 1987, 178. gKaplan and Hill, 1992.

seedlings were planted among the fallen trees and stumps. The land was pe-
riodically weeded to prevent weeds choking out the banana trees. Yet in these
tropical conditions the yield was more than 60 pounds of bananas (15,000
kilocalories) per labor hour. This is just another illustration of the Law of Di-
minishing Returns. With a vast land area at their disposal even foragers with
a very primitive agricultural technology can have very high outputs per worker.
Had work hours been as high as those in England in 1800, these foraging
and shifting cultivation societies would have had much greater outputs per
person than England. Whatever material prosperity the English had in 1800
was wrested from the soil by hard work and long hours. The evidence seems
to be that Marshall Sahlins was substantially correct when he controversially
claimed that foraging and shifting cultivation societies had a form of “primi-
tive affluence,” which was measured in the abundance of leisure as opposed

to goods.33

33. Sahlins, 1972.

68  chat R 3


Thus if anthropologists are correct about the low labor inputs of hunter-
gatherer societies then, while we would expect material living standards to be
the same between 10,000 BC and AD 1800, real living conditions probably
declined with the arrival of settled agriculture because of the longer work
hours of these societies. The Neolithic Revolution did not bring more leisure,
it brought more work for no greater material reward.

That still leaves a puzzling question. Why as the Industrial Revolution
approached had labor inputs in some societies increased so much? This issue
is addressed in chapter 9.

Asia versus Europe

European travelers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries routinely re-
ported that Chinese and Indian living conditions were below those of north-
western Europe. This is assumed in the writings of both Smith and Malthus.
While a recent collection of historians, called oddly enough the California
School, has argued that living conditions in Asia were just as good as those in
northwestern Europe, the evidence presented above contradicts this.34 In
terms   of wages, stature, diet, and occupations Japan, China, and India seem
much poorer in 1800 and earlier than Europe. This conclusion is backed by
evidence on the incidence of famines in England versus Japan. The last sig-
nificant nationwide famine to strike England was in 1315–17, when the grain
harvest across northern Europe failed for two years in a row. After that,
though there were local dearths, famine deaths on a national scale were neg-
ligible, even though the central government did little to promote grain storage
for scarce years. In contrast Japan in the Edo period (1603–1868) witnessed
at least seven nationwide famines. Those of 1783–87 and 1833–37 are both es-
timated to have killed more than 4 percent of the population.35

There are suggestions in the genetic data that this disparity in living stan-
dards between Europe and East Asia may go back over thousands of years.
Hunter-gatherers consume meat but not milk. Thus the arrival of settled agri-
culture   with animal domestication created the possibility of large-scale con-
sumption of milk from animals for the first time. However, people at very low
income levels do not typically consume many dairy products. Milk, butter,

34. See, for example, Pomeranz, 2000.

35. Jannetta, 1992, 428–29.

lv G STA a R s   69


and cheese are all expensive ways of getting calories, favored only by the rich.
Grains and starches are much cheaper calorie sources. Geographic factors that
affect the relative cost of production of animals and arable crops also play a
role, but in general only richer preindustrial agrarian economies consumed
milk regularly.

Consequently populations that never developed settled agriculture, such
as Australian Aboriginals, almost all lack a genetic mutation that permits
adults to digest lactose, a sugar found in milk. In contrast most people from
northwestern Europe have this mutation. However, Chinese adults, despite
their   very long history of settled agriculture and the variety of climate zones
within China, generally lack the ability to absorb lactose, suggesting that milk
was never a large part of the Chinese diet, and that by implication Chinese
living standards were generally low in the preindustrial era.36

The Success of the Malthusian Model

There is ample evidence in the historical and skeletal record to support the
key contention of the Malthusian model. Living conditions before 1800 were
independent of the level of technology of a society. But living standards did
vary substantially across societies before 1800. Medieval western Europe, for
example, in the period between the onset of the Black Death in 1347 and re-
newed population growth in 1550, was extraordinarily rich, rich even by the
standards of the poorest economies of the world today. Polynesia before Eu-
ropean contact also seems to have been prosperous. In contrast China, India,
and Japan in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries appear to have been
very poor. Chapters 4 and 5 consider the causes of these variations, which lay
in the determinants of fertility and mortality.

36. Stinson, 1992.

7  chat R 3


4  Fertility

In almost all the more improved countries of modern Europe, the principal check
which keeps the population down to the level of the actual means of subsistence
is the prudential restraint on marriage.      —Thomas Malthus (1830)1

Given that societies before 1800 were Malthusian, the only ways human
agency could improve living standards were by reducing fertility or increasing
mortality. Reducing fertility had two effects in a Malthusian economy. First
it  would increase living standards. Second it would increase life expectancy. If
the birth rate was at the biological maximum of 60 per thousand, life ex-
pectancy at birth would be a mere 17 years. If the birth rate could be reduced
to   25 per thousand, life expectancy would rise to 40.

The demography of northwestern Europe before 1800 has been inten-
sively researched. Parish records of baptisms, burials, and marriages in both
England and France allow historical demographers to establish fertility and
mortality rates back to 1540. From the earliest records birth rates in north-
western Europe were well below the biological possibilities. In England in
the 1650s, for example, when fertility was at its preindustrial minimum, the
birth rate was 27 per thousand, less than half the biological maximum. The
average English woman then gave birth to only 3.6 children.2

It used to be thought that fertility limitation of this magnitude was
unique to northwestern Europe and helped explain the prosperity of these
European areas compared to other preindustrial economies in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. The northwestern European marriage pattern was
unique for societies before 1800: women married late and large numbers of

1. Malthus, 1830, 254.

2. Wrigley et al., 1997, 614.

7


them never married.3 Indeed Malthus himself in the second and subsequent
editions of his Essay on the Principle of Population argued that the prosperity
of northwestern Europe was based on its exercise of the preventive check
through marriage choices. It was also thought that the fertility limitation of
northwestern Europe reflected a more individualistic, rational society in
which  men and women realized the costs of high fertility and took steps to
avoid it. Europe’s eventual experiencing of the Industrial Revolution was thus
foreshadowed hundreds of years earlier by its adoption of a modern marital
pattern  and family structure, a structure emphasizing individual choice and
restraint.4

More recent research, however, suggests most societies before 1800 lim-
ited fertility as strictly as did northwestern Europe, though by very different
mechanisms. It also suggests that the reasons for fertility limitation in north-
western Europe had little to do with rational individual calculation and much
more to do with social customs.

European Fertility

The marriage pattern that kept fertility in northwestern Europe well below
the biological possibilities is a curious one. There is no sign in these countries
before 1800 that contraceptive practices were consciously employed.5 Fertility
levels within marriage were always high. Table 4.1, for example, shows marital
fertility for a variety of countries in northwestern Europe before 1790 com-
pared to the Hutterite standard.6

Birth rates within marriage were lower than for the Hutterites, but by dif-
ferent amounts across countries. English fertility was the lowest, Belgian and
French the highest. A woman married from ages 20 to 44 had an average of

7.6 children in England in the years before 1790, but 9.1 in Belgium or France.
In comparison a Hutterite woman would have an average of 10.6 children in
these twenty-five years. But these European differences from Hutterite levels

3. Hajnal, 1965.

4. Macfarlane, 1978, 1987.

5. France just before the French Revolution is a possible exception, though any fertility
limitation there in the late eighteenth century was limited.

6. The Hutterites are communal Anabaptists of German origin, now mainly located in
Canada, with good health but early marriage and no fertility limitation within marriage. They
thus provide a reference on the possibilities of unrestricted fertility.

72  chat R 4


Table 4. Annual Birth Rate, Married Women, Europe before 1790


Country

Birth rate at age:

All births

or group    20–24   25–29   30–34   35–39   40–44   (20–44)

Hutterites    0.55    0.50    0.45    0.41    0.22     10.6

Belgium     0.48    0.45    0.38    0.32    0.20     9.1

France      0.48    0.45    0.40    0.32    0.16     9.1

Germany    0.45    0.43    0.37    0.30    0.16     8.6

Switzerland   0.45    0.38    0.34    0.22    0.16     7.8

Scandinavia   0.43    0.39    0.32    0.26    0.14     7.7

England     0.43    0.39    0.32    0.24    0.15     7.6

Source: Flinn, 1981, 86.

stemmed mostly from health and nutrition differences and from adherence to
different social practices, rather than individual targeting of fertility.

Part of the evidence against conscious contraceptive practices is the ab-
sence of fertility patterns that would be expected if there had been conscious
fertility control. With conscious control birth rates should be relatively lower
compared to the Hutterite standard for older women. For by then many
would have achieved their target family size and would have stopped having
children. As table 4.1 shows, however, the relative birth rate in early Europe
compared to Hutterite rates is instead about the same at all ages.

Similarly if there were a target number of children, then we might observe
that women with many children by a given age would show lower subse-
quent fertility.7 Or, with targets, the death of a child would increase the
chances of a birth in the following years, since the family would now be
falling farther below its target. Yet such targeting patterns do not occur within
European marriages before 1800.

The other source of evidence about fertility control comes from diaries,
letters, and literature. The diaries of Samuel Pepys, for example, give an
extraordinary insight into the habits and mores of the upper classes in Lon-
don   in 1660–69. Pepys was having extramarital sexual relationships, even

7. Both these tests unfortunately run into one problem: people have different targets for
family size. The ones who want lots of children may then marry earlier and so still have high
fertility levels at later ages.

 RT lt    73


abusing his stewardship of the Navy Office to obtain sexual favors from the
spouses of naval workers and contractors. Yet though he feared getting his
companions pregnant, he made no use of contraception. Instead he preferred
relationships with married women whose pregnancy could be attributed to
their husbands. Or, to his intense frustration, he refrained from penetration
in his amorous encounters.8

Yet despite the apparent absence of contraceptive practices, the birth rate
in most preindustrial western European populations was low, at only thirty to
forty births per thousand, because of the other features of the European mar-
riage pattern. These were as follows:

1. A late average age of first marriage for women: typically 24–26.

2. A decision by many women to never marry: typically 10–25 percent.

3. Low illegitimacy rates: typically 3–4 percent of births.

The low illegitimacy rates imply large-scale abstinence from sex outside mar-
riage, since the majority of women of reproductive age were unmarried.

These features avoided more than half of all possible births simply from
marriage patterns, as is illustrated in figure 4.1. The horizontal axis is the num-
ber  of women, the vertical their ages. The area of the rectangle gives the total
number of reproductive years per hundred women, assuming women are fer-
tile from 16 until 45.

Delayed marriage avoided nearly a third of possible births. Eschewing
marrying avoided 10–25 percent of the remaining births. Thus fertility was re-
duced by a third to a half by the marriage pattern. In addition, since the years
16–25 are those of higher fertility for women, the proportion of births avoided
is even higher than this exercise would suggest.

Table 4.2 shows the mean age at first marriage of women in various Eu-
ropean countries before 1790. Also shown is the number of children a women
married at the average age of first marriage would have if she lived to age 45.
Finally the total fertility rate, the number of children born to the average
woman who lived to age 50, is roughly calculated, taking into account the il-

8. See, for example, his affair with one Mrs. Bagwell, the wife of a navy carpenter; Pepys,
2000, July 9, 1663, May 31, 1664, October 20, 1664, January 23, 1665, and May 16, 1666. Once,
when he feared he had impregnated the wife of a naval officer who was then at sea, Pepys fran-
tically used his official position to recall the husband in time for the pregnancy to be attribut-
able to him.

74  chat R 4


45


35            Married and fertile

Never
marry

25

Delaying marriage

15

0.0      0.2      0.4      0.6      0.8      1.0

Fraction married

Figure 4. The European marriage pattern and fertility.

legitimacy rate and the likely fraction of women never marrying. Before 1790

women in northwestern Europe who survived to age 50 gave birth to between

4.5 and 6.2 children, with a median of 4.9. The median corresponds to a
crude birth rate of about 32 per thousand. By implication birth rates in Bel-
gium and France were about 40 per thousand.

East Asian Fertility

When Malthus wrote his various editions of the Essay on the Principle of Pop-
ulation he assumed that China represented the full misery of the Malthusian
Trap, and that oriental life was miserable as a result of high fertility. Re-
search over the past thirty years, however, suggests that, like preindustrial west-
ern Europe and like many forager societies, both China and Japan avoided
many potential births. Indeed Asian fertility rates, though arrived at through
completely different mechanisms, were likely as low as those in northwestern
Europe.

In Asia, as Malthus knew, the norm for women was early and nearly uni-
versal marriage. Recent studies of family lineages and local population regis-
ters suggest that first marriage for Chinese women around 1800 took place
on average at age 19. A full 99 percent of women in the general population

 RT lt    75


Table 4.2

Age of Marriage of Women and Marital Fertility in Europe before 1790

Mean age    Births per    Percentage     Total

Country       at first      married      never      fertility
or group       marriage     women      married      rate

Belgiuma         24.9       6.8        —       6.2*

Francea,b         25.3       6.5        10       5.8

Germanya        26.6       5.6        —       5.1*

Englanda         25.2       5.4        12       4.9

Netherlandsc       26.5       5.4*        —       4.9*
Scandinaviaa       26.1       5.1        14       4.5

Sources: aFlinn, 1981, 84. bWeir, 1984, 33–34. cDe Vries, 1985, 665.

Note: * denotes values inferred assuming missing values at European average.

married.9 Men also married young, first marriage occurring on average at 21.
But the share of men marrying was much lower, perhaps as low as 84 percent.
Chinese males were no more likely to marry than their northwestern Euro-
pean counterparts. This was because female infanticide created a surplus of
males, and men were more likely than women to remarry after the death of a
spouse.10 There is similar evidence that in nineteenth-century Japan marriage
was earlier than in preindustrial northwestern Europe and that it was nearly
universal for women.

But in both Japan and China fertility rates within marriage were lower
than in northwestern Europe. Table 4.3 shows the estimated age-specific birth
rates for married women averaged across various Chinese groups, and in
Japan, compared to those in northwestern Europe. At all ages within marriage
Chinese and Japanese women had fewer births per year. As a result a Chinese
or Japanese woman married from ages 20 to 45 would give birth to only about
5 children, as opposed to 8 in northwestern Europe. Across both upper and
lower classes the mean age of last birth was about 34 in China, compared to
nearly 40 in Europe.11

It is not known why marital fertility in East Asia was so low. As in pre-
industrial northwestern Europe there is no sign of an early curtailment of fer-

9. Lee and Feng, 1999, 67–68.

10. Ibid., 70–73, 89.

11. Because of female infanticide some of these birth rates are estimated from male births
alone, appropriately inflated; Lee and Feng, 1999, 87.

76  chat R 4


Table 4.3 Age-Specific Marital Fertility Rates outside Europe


Country

Fertility rate at age:

All

or group        20–24  25–29  30–34  35–39  40–44  (20–44)

Hutteritea          0.55   0.50   0.45   0.41   0.22   10.6

Northwestern Europea   0.45   0.42   0.35   0.28   0.16    8.3

Chinab            0.24   0.25   0.22   0.18   0.10    5.0

Japanb            0.29   0.25   0.22   0.15   0.12    5.2

Roman Egyptc       0.38   0.35    —    —    —    7.4

Sources: aTable 4.1. bLee and Feng, 1999, 87. cBagnall and Frier, 1994, 143–46.

tility that would clearly indicate family planning. Fertility rates within China
and Japan were uniformly about half those of the Hutterites at all ages. Pos-
sibly the very low incomes of preindustrial Asia played a role, for reasons
given below. Alternatively low fertility might result from adherence to social
customs that caused low fertility, rather than conscious individual fertility
control.12

These patterns imply that, despite early and nearly universal marriage,
the average woman in China or Japan around 1800 gave birth to fewer than
5 children, less than half the biological possibility, resulting in a birth rate
similar to that for eighteenth-century Europe.

An additional factor driving down birth rates (and also of course driving
up death rates) was the Chinese practice of female infanticide. For example,
based on the imbalance between recorded male and female births an esti-
mated 20–25 percent of girls died from infanticide in Liaoning. Evidence that
the cause was conscious female infanticide comes from the association be-
tween the gender imbalance of births and other factors. When grain prices
were high, more girls are missing. First children were more likely to be female
than later children. The chance of a female birth being recorded for later chil-
dren also declined with the numbers of female births already recorded for the
family. All this suggests female infanticide that was consciously and deliber-
ately practiced.13

12. Lee and Feng, 1999, 90–91, cite as contributors to low Chinese fertility rates both ex-
tended breast feeding and cultural beliefs that sexual activity was damaging to health.

13. Lee and Campbell, 1997, 64–75.

 RT lt    77


Female infanticide contributed to limiting the overall birth rate in later
generations by changing the adult sex ratio. Female infanticide meant that,
while nearly all women married, almost 20 percent of men never found brides.
Thus the overall birth rate per person, which determines life expectancy, was
reduced. The overall birth rate for the eighteenth century is unclear from the
data given in this study, but by the 1860s, when the population was station-
ary, it was around 35 per thousand, about the same as in preindustrial Europe,
and less than in many poor countries today. Earlier and more frequent mar-
riage than in northwestern Europe was counteracted by lower marital fertility
and by female infanticide, resulting in equivalent overall fertility rates.

Japan had a similar “Asian” pattern of fertility control. Measured birth
rates were as low as in northwestern Europe. One source of demographic
information for Japan is Buddhist temple death records. These records, doc-
umenting the memorial services for persons affiliated with the temple, suggest
that circa 1800 villages in the Hida region of Central Japan had a birth rate
of only 36 per thousand, little higher than in preindustrial England.14 These
low rates were the consequence of marriage and fertility patterns similar to
those in Liaoning.

Roman Egyptian Fertility

The one even earlier society for which we have demographic data is Roman
Egypt in the first three centuries AD. As in preindustrial China and Japan fe-
male marriage was early and universal. The estimated mean age at first mar-
riage for Egyptian women was even lower, at 17.5.15 Marital fertility rates,
however, were lower than in northwestern Europe, but higher than in China
and Japan: about two-thirds the Hutterite standard.

This early and universal marriage, and relatively high fertility rates within
marriage, would seem to imply high overall fertility rates. After all, at these
rates Egyptian women married from 17.5 until 50 would give birth to 8 or more
children. But in fact birth rates were 40–44 per thousand, implying a life ex-
pectancy at birth of 23–25 years. In comparison French birth rates in 1750

14. Jannetta and Preston, 1991, 426.

15. Bagnall and Frier, 1994, 114.

78  chat R 4


were about 40 per thousand. So Roman Egypt, despite early marriage, had
fertility levels only slightly higher than those in eighteenth-century France.16
The intervening factor that kept Egyptian birth rates lower than we would
expect was again social custom. In northwestern Europe younger widows
commonly remarried, but not in Roman Egypt. Furthermore, divorce was
possible in Egypt. But while divorced husbands commonly remarried younger
women, divorced women typically did not remarry. Thus while in Egypt
almost all the women got married, the proportion still married fell steadily
from age 20. Consequently women surviving to age 50 typically gave birth to
only 6 children rather than 8.17 Thus, for all the settled agrarian societies for
which we have good demographic data for the years before 1800, fertility rates

were well below the biological possibilities.

Forager Society Fertility

Forager societies also typically restrained their fertility, though in a pattern
more reminiscent of Asia than of northwestern Europe. Table 4.4 shows some
measures of fertility for modern forager groups: the average number of births
per woman per year, the average age of women at first birth, the average age
at last birth, and the total fertility rate (the number of births per woman who
lived to the end of her reproductive life). For the groups in table 4.4, the me-
dian total fertility rate was 4.5. The numbers of births per year in these
hunter-gatherer societies are thus again far below the biological possibilities.
These  birth rates are as low as, or even lower than, those of preindustrial
northwestern Europe. In England before 1790, for example, the average
woman similarly gave birth to 4.9 children across her entire reproductive life.
Thus fertility rates in England on the eve of the Industrial Revolution were
likely no lower than those for the earliest forager groups. This is one reason
why living standards did not show any upward tendency before the Indus-
trial Revolution. In Malthusian societies some kind of fertility control was the
norm rather than the exception. Only the sources of these controls varied
widely.

16. Weir, 1984, 32–33.

17. Average births per adult woman would be lower than this number because not all
women would live to age 50.

 RT lt    79


Table 4.4 Fertility in Modern Forager Societies

Births    Mean age    Mean age     Total
woman     at first      at last     fertility

Group          per year     birth      birth      rate

Achea              0.32       20       42      8.0

Yanomamoa          0.34      18       38      6.9

James Bay Creeb       0.37       22       39       6.3*
Cuiva (Hiwi)c         —       —       —       5.1

Arnhem Land       0.30      19       34      4.5*
(monogamous)b

Kutchin, pre-1900b     0.30      23       35      4.4

!Kungb             0.31       20       36      4.4

Batakb             0.44       18       26       3.8

Arnhem Land       0.18      19       34      2.8*
(polygamous)b

Median          0.32       20       36      4.5

Sources: aHill and Hurtado, 1996, 262. bKelly, 1995, 246. cHurtado and Hill, 1987, 180.

Note: * denotes values estimated from columns 2–4.

Explaining Preindustrial Fertility

Fertility was limited in almost all preindustrial societies. But, with rare excep-
tions such as France on the eve of the French Revolution, there is no evidence
that this was a conscious individual decision. Nor is there any indication that
control was exercised at the community level. People exhibited individual be-
haviors that limited fertility, but with scant evidence of an explicit objective.
This stark conclusion will be controversial among demographic historians,
but it can be amply supported by consideration of the details of people’s
behavior.18

Fertility control was absent within marriage in preindustrial northwestern
Europe. But were the delay and avoidance of marriage aimed, at the individ-
ual  or the community level, at reducing fertility? In later editions of the Prin-
ciples Malthus seems to assume that postponing or eschewing marriage was

18. Thus Macfarlane, 1987, argues that marriage decisions in preindustrial England were
individualistic, prudential, and calculating.

8  chat R 4


50

40

30

20

10

0

0           20           40           60           80

Real income per person (1860s = 100)

Figure 4.2 Income and fertility in England, 1540–1799.

the only way to limit fertility. (He himself did not get married till age 38, and
then to a woman of 27, who gave birth to only 3 children.)19

The case for marriage behavior as a planned limitation of fertility is
strengthened by the fact that the European marriage pattern prevailed to
different degrees in different epochs. In England, for example, it was most
marked in the seventeenth century; fertility limitations were so severe that
population sometimes declined. In the eighteenth century the average age of
first marriage by women declined, so that by 1800–50 it was 23.4 compared
to nearly 26 in the seventeenth century. The percentage of women never mar-
rying also declined, to 7 percent. Did fertility increase at the time of the In-
dustrial Revolution because of the enhanced job opportunities?

Yet the increase in birth rates in the eighteenth century occurred in a
context in which real wages and real incomes, from the 1730s to the 1790s,
were stagnant or declining. Figure 4.2 shows the birth rate plotted against real
income per person in England by decade from the 1540s to the 1790s. In

19. Ironically only two of Malthus’s children survived to marry, and neither of them had
children. So Malthus himself has no descendants.

 RT lt    8


preindustrial England there was at best a modest link over time between birth
rates and aggregate living standards. Shifts in birth rates owing to factors
other than income levels are more important than income-induced shifts in
explaining the decade-by-decade variations.

In addition the increase in fertility in the eighteenth century occurred
in all settings across England, not just places with enhanced industrial em-
ployment opportunities: rural parishes, industrial parishes, urban parishes.
Furthermore, if delayed marriage was a conscious attempt by individuals to
reduce   the numbers of children they had, then it has inexplicable features.
The first is that not marrying seems to have involved, at least for the woman,
a lifetime of sexual abstinence, since illegitimacy rates were so low. Given that
large numbers of women were prepared to eschew sexual pleasures for life, or
delay them for a decade or more, it is mysterious that once they married they
abandoned themselves wantonly to sexual passions.20

Once a woman married no control was exercised, no matter how many
children had already been born and were still alive. The randomness of births
and deaths in the preindustrial world meant that the numbers of surviving
children varied enormously across families. A sample of 2,300 English mar-
ried men’s wills from the early seventeenth century shows, for example, that,
while 15 percent died with no surviving children, 4 percent died with 8 or
more surviving children. If delaying marriage was about consciously control-
ling fertility then why did those with the abundance of children show no
signs of abstinence within the later years of their marriages, compared to their
less fecund compatriots?

Another difficulty emerges if we consider the “marriage market.” In look-
ing for a spouse people were looking not just for affection but also for a part-
ner who would be an economic asset. Both wives and husbands in the poorer
classes had to work, for example, and a good worker would add substantially
to the comfort of the partner. Surviving descriptions of courtship behavior
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have a fairly unromantic caste;
the focus of the parties was as much or more on the character and energy
of the prospective spouse as on his or her physical attractiveness. Younger
women would be less desirable as marriage partners, it was argued, because

20. Selective abstinence is practiced in many foraging societies through, for example, so-
cial customs that forbid sexual relations between a married couple for a period after the birth
of each child.

82  chat R 4


they had more potential childbearing capacity. That is why they tended to get
married later.

But this would imply that the age of marriage for women would be
pushed up in this society beyond the age of marriage for men. The age at
which men marry has no effect on the number of children they would have to
support. But the age of marriage of men was always two to three years higher
than that for women, as it is in modern western countries. When the age of
first marriage fell in England in the eighteenth century, it fell equally for men
and women.

Finally once a woman has delayed marriage until age 30 or 35, the ex-
pected number of children she would bear falls to a small number under
preindustrial conditions. In England the average woman marrying at 35 would
give  birth to fewer than 1.9 children, and even one marrying at 30 would give
birth to fewer than 3.5 children.21 So by age 30 the number of children that
a woman would expect to have who would survive to adulthood would be
close to 2. Thus there was no reason to delay marriage beyond 30 if fertility
limitation was the issue. Yet many women remained celibate their entire lives,
and many did not marry until their mid-thirties or later.

Nor is there any sign that the marital pattern in northwestern Europe was
the result of community controls. For communities had very limited means
to prevent marriages. In preindustrial England, for example, by age 21 chil-
dren could marry without parental consent. The authorities in England did
attempt to raise the age of marriage in many places by requiring apprentices
to trades not to marry and by making them complete long apprenticeships (as
long as seven years). But since apprenticeships began at age 14, this would not
explain the much higher average age of marriage for men, 26–28.

Ministers and parishioners also sometimes explicitly tried to stop marriages
by refusing to read the bans (the required announcement of the intention
to marry, to be read for three weeks prior to the marriage date) or to allow a
ceremony.22

But such tactics, which were of dubious legality anyway under both
canon and common law, were likely to prevent or delay relatively few mar-
riages, and those only in the more rural parishes. In a large city such as London,

21. Based on the fertility rates in table 4.2 the numbers would be 1.9 and 3.5 if the woman
survived to age ę/. Not all women would, so these numbers are upper bounds.

22. Ingram, 1985, 145.

 RT lt    83


which by the seventeenth century had swelled to over half a million people,
a tenth of the population of England, such tactics would be futile. For even
if the local parish refused to marry the couple, there was a cheap and easy
alternative. Preindustrial England before 1753 had its own equivalents of Las
Vegas wedding chapels.

Because of the arcane and involved nature of ecclesiastical authority, at
a number of places in London free-lance chaplains, who made their living
from the fees paid by couples, were able to legally marry couples without the
formal posting of bans and a public marriage ceremony. These marriages were
valid if they did not violate other church rules concerning marriages. The
most popular place was the Fleet Prison and its “rules.”23 Between 1694 and
1754 an average of four thousand such marriages were performed yearly.24
Since in these same years there were only six thousand marriages per year in
London, the Fleet prison was a huge purveyor of weddings. The marriage reg-
isters suggest that people also traveled from counties near London for a Fleet
wedding. There were other lesser London marriage emporiums, such as the
Southwark Mint and the King’s Bench prison rules. Thus in London there
was   no effective control over marriage by local parishes. Yet the average age of
marriage and the percentage of the populace not marrying do not seem to
have been any lower in London and its environs than in remote rural areas
where communities might exert more informal controls.

Consequently social controls do not seem plausible as an explanation for
the late age and low frequency of marriage before 1700. Individual choice was
the determining element. But, as noted, such choices seemed to be centered
on factors other than conscious control of fertility.

The Birth Rate and Income

There has been much debate by historical demographers as to whether in
the Malthusian era the adjustment of population to resources was ensured

23. The “rules” of a prison were the area around a prison house in which prisoners im-
prisoned for debt were allowed, after giving enough security to clear their debts if they fled, to
live and continue in their normal work where possible.

24. The prison was surrounded by public houses where chaplains had established wed-
ding chapels and where the newly wed couple could celebrate their union; Brown, 1981.

84  chat R 4


primarily by changes in death rates or changes in birth rates. When popula-
tion got so large that incomes fell, for example, was the population reduced
mainly by increased mortality or by declining fertility? A world in which
adjustment was mainly through changes in fertility was somehow seen as a
“kindler and gentler” Malthusian world than one in which variations in death
rates did the work.

So what was the slope of the curve that connected birth rates and income
levels in the preindustrial world? We saw that the aggregate data for England
by decade from the 1540s to the 1790s suggest that this curve might be quite
flat. But if both the birth and death rate schedules were shifting up and down
from decade to decade, then the points we observe in figure 4.2 might reveal
little of the true relationship between income and fertility.

A better picture of the role of income in fertility potentially comes from
comparing the fertility of rich and poor people at any one time. Because the
parish sources that provide evidence of fertility rates in preindustrial north-
western Europe do not indicate the income or even the occupation of the par-
ents, this subject has previously been investigated only on a limited scale and
by a mere handful of studies.25

For England, however, we can derive a fairly good estimate of the eco-
nomic position of men by studying their wills. In the seventeenth century at
least wills were drawn up by a wide variety of people, from the poor to the
rich. Here is a will typical except for its brevity:

joHN WIsEmaN of Thorington, Carpenter [signed with an X], 31 January

1623.

To youngest son Thomas Wiseman, £15 paid by executrix when 22.
Wife Joan to be executrix, and she to bring up said Thomas well and
honestly in good order and education till he be 14, and then she is to
bind him as apprentice. To eldest son John Wiseman, £5. To son Robert
Wiseman, £5 when 22. To daughter Margery, £2, and to daughter Eliza-
beth,  £2. To son Matthew Wiseman, £0.25. Rest of goods, ready money,
bonds, and lease of house where testator dwells and lands belonging to go
to wife Joan. Probate, 15 May 1623.26

25. For example, the village of Nuits in France during the period 1744–92, studied by
Hadeishi, 2003.

26. Allen, 1989, 266.

 RT lt    85


Wills could bequeath very small amounts, such as the following:

WILLIam sTURTENE of Tolleshunt Major, Husbandman, 14 November

1598.

To Francis my son 10s. To Thomas Stonard my son-in-law 1 cow in
consideration of money which I owe him. To William and Henry his sons
and Mary his daughter each a pewter platter. To Elizabeth my wife the rest
of my goods. Probate, 3 February 1599.27

Wills were not made by a random sample of the population; they were
made more often by those who had property to bequeath. But the custom of
making wills seems to have extended well down the social hierarchy in pre-
industrial England. In Suffolk in the 1620s perhaps as many as 39 percent of
males who lived past age 16 made a will that was probated.28 Higher-income
individuals were more likely to leave a will, but there are plenty of wills avail-
able   for those at the bottom of the economic hierarchy, such as laborers,
sailors, shepherds, and husbandmen.

The estimated wealth of testators was constructed from the information
in wills by adding together cash bequests and the estimated value of houses,
land, animals, and grain bequeathed by the testator. Average wealth equaled

£235 in 1630s prices.29 But the median was only £100. This would generate an
annual income of about £6 at the return on capital typical of this period. The
yearly earnings of a carpenter in this period would be about £18, and those of
a laborer £12. The wills thus covered men across a wide range of wealth.

These wealth measures correlate well with literacy, as measured by whether
the person signed the will, and with the occupation or social status of the per-
son. Table 4.5 shows this by dividing testators into seven broad occupational
categories. Members of the gentry at the top of the scale were mostly literate
and  had average bequests of more than £1,200. Laborers at the bottom were
mostly illiterate and had average bequests of £42. But within each social rank
there were huge wealth variations. There were laborers wealthier than some of
the gentry. Indeed knowing someone’s occupation explains only about one-
fifth of the wealth variation across testators.

27. Emmison, 2000, 171.

28. To probate a will means to register it in the appropriate court. Since probate had a
cost others would have made wills that were never probated.

29. The breakdown was as follows: 1.1 houses, £44; 9.9 acres of land, £99; goods, £4; and
cash, £88.

86  chat R 4


Table 4.5 Testators by Social Rank, 1585–1638

Average   Maximum

Fraction of    value of     value of
Number     testators     bequests    bequests

Social group      of wills     literate      (£)       (£)

Gentry          94       0.94      1,267      8,040

Merchants/       116       0.88       267      1,540
professionals

Farmers         824       0.53       376      6,352

Traders         116       0.46       124      1,226

Craftsmen       340       0.42        78       600

Husbandmen      377       0.26        82      1,898

Laborers        111       0.17        42       210

Source: Clark and Hamilton, 2006.

For about a fifth of these three thousand men we have information from
the parish baptism records on the number of children to whom their wives
gave birth. Figure 4.3 shows the estimated total number of births to 645 men
in England, mainly those who died in the years 1620–38, by the size of the
bequest they left. This shows a clear and strong association between wealth
and births. The richer half of male testators fathered 40 percent more children
than the poorer half.

We can gain some insight into the reasons for that association if we divide
men into “rich,” those with wealth at death of more than £100, and “poor,”
those with less than £100. This differentiation is shown in table 4.6. Richer
men were more likely to be married and lived slightly longer than poor men.
But the major reason for their greater numbers of births was that, per year of
marriage, richer men fathered more children. A richer man married for twenty
or  more years fathered 9.2 children, while a poorer man would have only 6.4,
an advantage to the rich man of over 40 percent. The rich of preindustrial
England thus had fertility rates within marriage that fully equaled Hutterite
levels.30 This again illustrates the absence of fertility control within marriage

30. An exact comparison is not possible, since some wives would have died before age 45,
reducing apparent fertility rates. Some of the men would then have remarried, and if they mar-
ried younger women it would have increased the apparent fertility rates.

 RT lt    87


8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

1-9     10-24    25-49    50-99    100-249   250-499   500-999   1000+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 4.3 Births per man in England, by wealth at death.

Table 4.6 Fertility and Wealth in England, 1620–1638

Number of

Variable             observations     Poorer     Richer

Average births            642        4.2      5.8

Average bequest           642        £44     £534

Percent never married         642        9%      5%

Average age at death         499       53.6      56.1

Age at first marriage         128       27.5      27.4

Age of wife at marriage         51       25.0      23.6

Births, married 20+ years       304        6.4      9.2


BirthsJapan       BirthsEngland

DeathsEngland

DeathsJₐpₐn

y Japan           y England

Income per person

Figure 4.4 Fertility and mortality: England versus Japan.

in preindustrial northwestern Europe. Testators with wealth of less than £25 at
death, who had been married twenty or more years, had only 5.4 births.

Europe versus Asia

Given that the gross fertility rate was about the same in northwestern Europe
as in East Asia, why were living standards so low in Asia? The observation above
that fertility within marriage increased with income in England suggests that
the low fertility within marriage in Asia may in part be just a product of
poorer nutrition. Figure 4.4 shows the apparent difference in the Malthusian
equilibrium in preindustrial England and East Asia. If fertility within mar-
riage  also increased with income in Japan and China, then the observed sim-
ilarity in birth rates implies that at a given income fertility was higher in
Japan and China. So Europe did apparently have a low fertility regime com-
pared to Asia, and in this respect Malthus seems correct in his suppositions.31

31. In preindustrial China, however, gross fertility among high-status lineage groups in
the Beijing nobility was lower than for peasants in Liaoning. Total marital fertility was higher
in the lower-status community, and the percentage of women marrying was somewhat higher;
Lee and Feng, 1999, 68, 85.

 RT lt    89


But if the only difference between northwestern Europe and Asia was
fertility rates at a given income, then the birth rate should have been higher
in Japan (assuming a declining death rate schedule) and life expectancy con-
sequently lower. To get the same aggregate birth rate at lower income levels
seems also to imply that mortality rates for a given income were lower in
Asia. Europe seems to have gained twice over: from both lower fertility and
higher mortality.

Thus living standards stayed well above the physical subsistence mini-
mum in the preindustrial world, because most societies had customs and so-
cial mores that kept fertility well below the biological possibilities. The way
these customs operated, however, varied greatly across societies. If modern
foragers are any guide to the distant past, our ancestors of the savannah prob-
ably limited fertility as much as did settled agrarian societies around 1800.

The empirical finding in the previous chapter of the absence of any sign
of improving living conditions before 1800, even for technologically advanced
societies, is explained in part by the probable absence of any fertility decline
before 1800. Mortality rates, however, were also crucial in the Malthusian era
in determining living standards. What happened to mortality as man moved
from a forager lifestyle into settled agrarian society? Chapter 5 considers this
question.

9  chat R 4


5  Life Expectancy

Oh happy people of the future, who have not known these miseries and per-
chance will class our testimony with the fables. We have, indeed, deserved these
[punishments] and even greater; but our forefathers also have deserved them,
and   may our posterity not also merit the same.

—Letter from Petrarch to his brother at the onset of the Black Death in Italy (1348)1

In this chapter we consider two main questions. The first is whether, as as-
sumed in the Malthusian model, preindustrial mortality was a declining func-
tion of income. In England, for example, in the years 1540–1800, just as for
birth rates, there is no sign of any association between national mortality rates
and national income levels, as would be expected in the Malthusian model.
Did England, and perhaps also the Netherlands, escape the Malthusian con-
straints long before 1800?

The second question involves the role of differences in mortality rates (at
a given income level) in explaining income differences across societies before
1800. There were substantial variations in incomes across preindustrial soci-
eties. England and the Netherlands, for example, had comparatively high in-
comes in the eighteenth century, while Japan had a very low income. Part of
this difference can be attributed to differences in fertility rates. But, as discussed
above, part also would have to come from mortality differences. Can we find
evidence of such differences?

Life Expectancy

Since in the preindustrial world, even with various mechanisms for limiting
births, fertility levels were high by modern standards, mortality rates had to
be high as well. As we have seen, in the stationary populations typical of the

1. Deaux, 1969, 94.

9


preindustrial world life expectancy at birth was just the inverse of the birth
rate. Life expectancy at birth in England averaged only 37 years between 1540
and 1800. Life expectancy at birth, at 28 in the latter half of the eighteenth
century, was even lower in preindustrial France (which also had a higher birth
rate).2

These low life expectancies are often misinterpreted in popular writings
to mean that few people survived into their forties. But though the chances
of living to the biblical three score and ten were much less than today, there
were plenty of elderly people in the preindustrial world. Fully 15 percent of
the English men making wills in the seventeenth century died at age 70 or
above. Those who lived long enough to become famous had even better
prospects of getting to their biblical entitlement. The mean age at death of a
sample of 1,064 notable scientists and philosophers born between 1500 and
1750 was 66: Berkeley was 67; Goethe, 83; Hume, 65; Kant, 80; Leibniz, 70;

Locke, 72; Molière, 51; Newton, 85; Adam Smith, 68; Voltaire, 83.3

These considerable ages reflect the fact that life expectancy at age 20 was
as high, or even higher, than life expectancy at birth. Natal life expectancy was
so low because infant and child mortality were so high. In England from 1580
to 1800 18 percent of infants died within the first year. Only 69 percent of
newborns made it to their fifteenth birthday. But those lucky enough to cel-
ebrate  a fifteenth birthday could then expect to celebrate thirty-seven more.
Tables 5.1–5.3 show indicators of mortality and life expectancy for a vari-

ety of societies: life expectancy at birth and at 20 years of age, as well as the
fraction of people dying within one year and fifteen years of birth. Table 5.1
shows these measures for modern forager societies. Since these are small pop-
ulations of innumerate people, individual estimates of life expectancy for
these groups are subject to considerable error. Life expectancy at birth in these
groups ranged from 24 to 37, with a median of 32.5 years: less than that for eigh-
teenth-century England, but as good or better than life expectancies for all the
other agrarian societies listed in table 5.2.

Table 5.2 shows life expectancy for settled agrarian societies in the Mal-
thusian era. Preindustrial England stands out as having relatively good life
expectancies. There was, however, no trend toward improved life expectancy in
England from 1550 to 1800. The other settled agrarian societies before 1800—

2. Weir, 1984, 32.

3. Mokyr, 2006.

92  chat R 5


Table 5. Life Expectancy for Modern Foragers

Life      Life          Deaths
expectancy  expectancy   Infant   at ages

at birth   at age 20   mortality   0–15

Group               (e0)      (e20)     (%)    (%)

Ache, Paraguaya             37      37      12     34

Kutchin, Yukonb            35*      —      17     35

Hadza, Tanzaniab            33      39      21     46

!Kung, Ngamiland, Botswanab     32*      —      12     42

!Kung, Dobe, Botswanab        30       40      26     44

Agta, Philippinesb            24      47      37     49

Sources: aHill and Hurtado, 1996, 196. bPennington, 2001, 192.

Note: * denotes values estimated from share of population dying by age 15.

China, Egypt, France, Italy, and Japan—generally had lower life expectancies.
Thus on average life expectancy in settled agrarian societies was no higher,
and possible a bit lower, than for modern foragers.

Death rates were typically much higher in towns and cities than in the
countryside. Urban mortality was indeed so high that, were it not for con-
tinual migration from the countryside, the cities would have faded from the
earth. In London from 1580 to 1650, for example, there were only 0.87 births
for every death. Without migration the population would have declined by a
half percent every year.

Early towns were generally crowded and unsanitary, so that infectious
diseases such as plague, typhus, dysentery, and smallpox spread quickly. Life
expectancy at birth in London in the late eighteenth century, a mere 23 years,
was  thus lower than for most preindustrial societies, even though London then
was perhaps the richest city in the world. As late as 1800 Londoners were not
able to reproduce themselves: 30 percent of all infants died in the first year of
life. Indeed urban dwellers in Roman Egypt had a better life expectancy than
eighteenth-century Londoners.

The greater mortality rates of towns shows in the data from the English
male testators, though there we have evidence only from smaller towns such
as Bury St. Edmonds, Colchester, and Ipswich and not from London itself.
While life expectancy at age 25 was 56 in the countryside, it was only 50 in the
towns. And while 67 percent of children born in the country survived to

l x ctac   93


Table 5.2

Life Expectancy in Agrarian Economies

Life     Life         Deaths
expectancy  expectancy   Infant   at ages

at birth   at age 20  mortality  0–15

Group                (e0)     (e20)     (%)    (%)

Western Europe

Italy (medieval Pistoia)a        29      25     21    56

England, 1550–99b           38      33     18    30

England, 1650–99b           35      31     18    32

France, 1750–89c            28      —     21    —

England, 1750–99b           38      34     17    30

East Asia and Africa

Egypt (rural), 11–257d         28      21     —    45

China (Anhui), 1300–1880e      28      33      —     —
China (Beijing), 1644–1739e      26      30      —     —
China (Liaoning), 1792–1867e     26      35      —     —
Rural Japan, 1776–1815f        33      37      25     50

Urban

Egypt (urban), 11–257d        24      17     —    48

London, 1750–99g           23      —     30    —

Sources: aHerlihy, 1967, 283–88. bWrigley et al., 1997, 224, 256, 614. cWeir, 1984; Flinn, 1981,

92. dBagnall and Frier, 1994, 334–36. eLee and Feng, 1999, 54–55. fJannetta and Preston, 1991,

427–28. gLanders, 1993, 136, 158, 170–71.

Note: Life expectancy at age 0 is assumed to be three years less than life expectancy at age
6 months. One-quarter of girls are assumed to have died at birth from infanticide. Life ex-
pectancy at 20 is estimated from life expectancy at 15.

appear in their fathers’ wills, in the towns it was only 64 percent. Surprisingly,
though, the lower reproduction rate of those in the towns was due mainly
to differences in fertility. The average testator in the countryside fathered 5.1
children, while the average town dweller fathered only 4.3.

For the years before 1540 it is generally possible to estimate only adult
life expectancy. Table 5.3 shows these estimates. The Roman Empire outside
Egypt provides just two reliable pieces of evidence. The first is a list of the
hundred town councilors at Canusium, in southern Italy, in AD 223. From
the regular succession of office holding it is possible to estimate that life ex-
pectancy for town councilors at age 25 was 32–34. This is upper-class male life

94  chat R 5


Table 5.3 Preindustrial Life Expectancy at Age 20

Group                    Age     Life expectancy at 20

Magistrates, Canusium, Italy, AD 223a      25         33

Ex-slaves, Italy, ca. AD 200a            22.5         28

England

1300–48 (tenants)b                20+          28

1350–1400 (tenants)b              20+         32

1440–1540 (monks)c              20          27

1600–1638 (testators)            20          35

England, 1750–99d                 20          34

Rural Japan, 1776–1815d              20          37

Rural China (Liaoning), 1792–1867d       20          35

Modern foragersd                  20          40

Sources: aDuncan-Jones, 1990, 94–97. bRazi, 1980. cHarvey, 1993, 128. dTables 5.1 and 5.2.

expectancy. The second piece of evidence is a table constructed by a jurist,
Ulpian. This was a guide to the length of time that bequests of life annuities,
typically to freed slaves, would be a burden on testators’ estates. Life ex-
pectancy at age 22 was 28 in Ulpian’s table. These data, if correct, show lower-
class life expectancy.

In England life expectancies in the medieval period can be estimated for
male tenants of land and cottages on medieval manors, and for members of
monastic communities. Zvi Razi used the court records of Halesowen to de-
termine the interval between male tenants’ first acquiring property and their
death. Since the minimum legal age was 20, the average age at first property
holding must be 20+. The estimated life expectancy of males in their early
twenties was 28 years before the onset of the Black Death, and 32 years in the
50 years after the first outbreak. This is close enough to life expectancy in
England at age 20 in the years 1580–1800 that we cannot be sure, absent ad-
ditional evidence on medieval infant and child mortality, that life expectancy
in England was in fact any lower in 1300 than in 1800.

In both China and Japan life expectancies at age 20 were as high or higher
than those in England in 1800. These societies had a different pattern of mor-
tality, with infant mortality relatively greater than in Europe, probably as a
result of infanticide, and adult mortality consequently lower.

l x ctac   95


It would be nice to directly compare the life expectancies for Europe in
the years after 1300 with those of communities before 1300, to test further the
claim made above that living conditions did not improve between the Neo-
lithic and 1800. Unfortunately, while it is possible to estimate the age at death
from skeletal remains, no reliable way has been found to translate these esti-
mates into estimates of life expectancy at a given age. Skeletal material from
the very young and the very old does not survive so well in the ground as that
of prime-age adults, so that the surviving remains are unrepresentative.

However, modern foragers had a higher life expectancy at age 20 than any
other group in table 5.3, and this suggests that in the Stone Age life prospects
at 20 were better than for the much more technologically advanced societies
of Asia and Europe in 1800. Thus, as with material living conditions and fer-
tility, there was probably little change in life expectancy in the preindustrial
world all the way from the original foragers to 1800. Since fertility was likely
similar between forager and settled agrarian societies, the mortality rate must
also have been similar.

Income and Mortality

There is no correlation decade by decade in England from 1540 to 1800 be-
tween income levels and death rates. Figure 5.1, for example, shows decadal
infant mortality rates as a function of income levels. If anything infant mor-
tality is higher in high-income periods. After 1540 temporary income shocks,
such as bad harvests, also had little apparent impact on mortality, and this
observation has led some to conclude that England escaped the grip of the
Malthusian economy long before 1800.4 However, as the figure shows, this
pattern may just reflect shifts over time in the death rate schedule.

Infant mortality rates in eight London parishes in the years 1538–1653 can
be compared with the percentage of the households in each parish that were
“substantial” according to the tax listings of 1638. Figure 5.2 shows that the
infants  of the rich had much better survival chances. Indeed the crude measure
of household income used here explains 62 percent of the variation in infant
mortality rates in London. Furthermore, though London had notoriously
high mortality rates, with the population maintaining itself only through

4. “The results question the usefulness of Malthusian models for early modern European
economic history”; Weir, 1984, 27.

96  chat R 5


50

D "(y )

D (y )

40                  D '(y )

30

20            Birth rate

10

0

0           20           40           60           80

Real income per person (1860s = 100)

Figure 5. English death rates and real incomes by decade, 1540–1800. Death rates from Wrigley
et al., 1997, 614.

constant immigration from the countryside, the infant mortality rates of the
richer parishes were better than those for England as a whole in these years.5
The wills used above to estimate birth rates by income can also give some
insight into mortality rates by income. Figure 5.3 shows the life expectancy
of male testators at age 25 in England in the early seventeenth century. The
effects of income on adult life expectancy are modest but still significant. Tes-
tators with £500 or more as a bequest had a life expectancy at 25 of 32 years,

compared to 26 years for those with a bequest of £25 or less.

Figure 5.4 shows the fraction of children born to testators by bequest
class who survived to be mentioned in the will. Again the effects of income
are modest but clear. While only 63 percent of the children of poorer testators
survived, 69 percent of the children of the richer testators survived.

The failure of the aggregate data for England to show any relationship
between income or wages and the death rate thus seems to be merely the
product of shifts of the death rate schedule over time caused by changes in the

5. The overall infant mortality rate for England in 1580–1649 was 169; Wrigley et al.,

1997, 219.

l x ctac   97


350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

0      10      20      30      40      50      60      70

Percentage of households substantial


Figure 5.2

1993, 186–88.

Household wealth and infant mortality in England, 1538–1653. Data from Landers,

40

England, married average

30

20

10

0

0-9    10-24    25-49    50-99   100-249   250-499   500-999   1000+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 5.3 Life expectancy at 25 for male testators in England, 1620–38. Mortality rates from
Wrigley et al., 1997, 614–15.


1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0-24          25-99         100-499         500+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 5.4 Survival rates for the children of richer and poorer testators.

disease environment, changes in the degree of urbanization (which drove up
mortality rates), and improvements in sanitation and medical practices. So
overall it seems safe to assume that even up until 1800 there was in all societies
an inherent, but shifting, trade-off between income and mortality rates that
tied long-run incomes to the level which balanced fertility with mortality.

Mortality and Living Standards

Fertility rates did not seemingly vary much across the preindustrial world, at
least where we can observe fertility. Fertility rates in England in 1800 were no
lower than those in eighteenth-century Japan or in forager societies. Living
standards did vary considerably across preindustrial societies, however. Refer-
ring,  for example, to figure 3.1, living standards of English laborers in 1450
were three times as high as in 1300, and nearly double the levels of 1800. This
variation in living standards would seem to be explained mostly by variation
in mortality rates at given levels of income.

Thus the explanation for the very high living standards of Europeans in
the years 1350–1600 was undoubtedly the arrival of the Black Death in 1347.
Its first onslaught in the years 1347–49 carried away 30–50 percent of the

l x ctac   99


population of Europe. But the plague continued to strike periodically there-
after for the next three hundred years. In England between 1351 and 1485 there
were thirty plague outbreaks. As late as 1604, for example, the city of York lost
at least a quarter of its population in one year to plague. Paris had twenty-two
plague epidemics from 1348 to 1596.6

Plague outbreaks mysteriously diminished in frequency and severity in
western Europe from the late seventeenth century onward. The last great Eu-
ropean plague epidemics were in 1657 in Italy, in the 1660s in France, in 1663
in Holland, in 1665 in London, and in the 1670s in Austria and Germany. Yet
the plague did not disappear elsewhere in the world; it remained endemic in
many parts of Asia. Plague had been present in Hunan in China since at least
1792, but in the late nineteenth century it spread to other parts of China and
from there to Bombay, where it killed six million in the 1890s.7

The bacterium that causes plague, Yersinia pestis, seemed to lose none of
its virulence with time. In the nineteenth-century Indian outbreak from 60
to 90 percent of the infected population died. In a late outbreak in Marseilles
in 1721, 78 percent of those infected died, as did 80 percent of the infected in
Noja, Italy, in a small outbreak in 1815. Thus the London outbreak of 1665
killed perhaps 16 percent of the city’s population. The 1657 outbreak in Italy
killed 44 percent of the populations of the afflicted cities.8

The continued virulence of the disease in these later outbreaks is one of
the reasons its disappearance from Europe remains a medical mystery.

We know a considerable amount about preindustrial plagues because of
the later Asian outbreak. In the course of this late-nineteenth-century out-
break the plague bacterium, as well as the means of transmission, was dis-
covered independently by French and Japanese investigators. If the medieval
plague was similar to this later outbreak, it was transmitted not from person
to person but through the bites of infected fleas. The fleas’ preferred host is
rats, but when rats die from the disease the fleas move on to people, spread-
ing the plague bacterium.9

6. Cipolla, 1993, 132; Galley, 1995, 452.

7. Benedict, 1988. The plague spread from Bombay to England through rats on grain
ships, but it was contained there with the loss of only six people. An even more recent outbreak
in India in 1994 infected at least seven hundred people.

8. Cipolla, 1993, 133.

9. The British performed experiments, such as suspending guinea pigs at different heights
above plague-infested fleas, to see just how high the fleas could jump.

  chat R 5


Bubonic plague was so called because of the “buboes” or boils, caused by
swelling of the lymph nodes, which appear in the groin and armpits of the
afflicted. The plague was particularly loathsome because of the appearance of
the sick and because they exude an unbearable stench. Agonizing pain accom-
panies the boils, and sufferers normally die four to seven days after symptoms
appear.

In line with modern beliefs on how the disease was transmitted, epi-
demics were reported sometimes to be preceded by the appearance of large
numbers of dying rats. Since rats do not move great distances the plague
would thus spread at a slow pace from one district of a town to another.

Yet in preindustrial Europe no one made the connection between rats
and the plague. Instead all kinds of absurd theories as to the cause and trans-
mission of the disease were put forward, even as late as the London outbreak
of 1665. It was widely believed both that people were infectious and that the
plague came from a poisonous cloud called a “miasma” being exuded from
the earth in certain localities.10 Thus a further horror of the disease was that
the afflicted were often abandoned to their fate. Sometimes the city or com-
mune would order that their houses be sealed with the sick inside. In the
1665 London outbreak attempts to control the disease included such useless
measures as killing large numbers of cats and dogs, shutting up the infected
in  their homes, sniffing herbs to ward off bad air, and burning fires in the
streets to dispel the supposedly poisonous air.

The plague years from 1347 to the 1660s are often taken by historians as
a period when Europe was sadly afflicted. If we understand the Malthusian
model we see that the plague was not the harsh judgment of a vengeful Old
Testament God on a sinful Europe, but merely a mild reproof by a beneficent
New Age–style deity. We saw that the plague, by increasing death rates at any
given material living standard, raised living standards all across Europe in
these years. Since birth rates were a function of income, these should have in-
creased with the income gains of the plague years, so reducing life expectancy.
But table 5.3 suggests that any reductions in adult life expectancy after the
onset of the plague were modest. The life expectancies of tenants and monks
at age 20 in the plague years were no worse than those for tenants before the
onset of the plague. After the initial onset the plague offered Europeans a

10. Special tight-fitting garments were made for those who administered to the sick and
dying, to protect them from the miasma.

l x ctac   


greatly enhanced material lifestyle at small cost in terms of the average length
of life. In the Malthusian world gifts from God took surprising forms!

Dutch and English Mortality

The plague explains the high incomes of many European societies in the
medieval period. The eventual disappearance of the plague from Europe—
because of its dependence for transmission on a sufficiently large rat popula-
tion in close proximity to people—is probably due to improvements in stan-
dards of cleanliness in Europe in the seventeenth century. The result for many
European societies was, of course, lower incomes. But incomes in both England
and the Netherlands remained high compared to those in most preindustrial
societies, particularly those of South and East Asia. Why were England and
the Netherlands comparatively wealthy in the eighteenth century?

Some see this as the first breaking of the Malthusian trap, a break that
first occurred in the Netherlands around 1600.11 But even though both the
Netherlands and England witnessed productivity advances in the seventeenth
century that were unusually rapid by preindustrial standards, the rates of
these advances were too low to raise incomes much above subsistence, given
the continued link of population with income.

Figure 5.5, for example, shows real wages in the Netherlands versus the
population by decade from the 1500s to the 1810s. In the early sixteenth cen-
tury the Dutch experienced the same real wage declines as the rest of Europe
as populations everywhere grew. But from the 1570s to the 1670s the Dutch
were able to expand their production possibilities and experience both rising
population and increasing wages. However, the efficiency advance that appears
between the 1570s and 1670s, in the so-called Dutch Golden Age, was fol-
lowed by a period of technological stagnation, characteristic of Malthusian
economies, from then until the 1810s. During that 140-year period of stasis,
when the population had plenty of time to adjust to the subsistence level, real
wages remained high by preindustrial standards in the Netherlands (see fig-
ure 3.2 and table 3.4).

High Dutch real wages seem to stem from bad health conditions in the
Netherlands in two ways. First, given the effects we observe in England of
income on gross fertility, Dutch fertility remained surprisingly constrained

11. See, for example, de Vries and van der Woude, 1997, 687–89.

2  chat R 5


200

160

1720s


120

1500s

1580s

1650s

80

1810s

40                                 Productivity gains

0

0.0        0.5        1.0        1.5        2.0        2.5

Population (millions)

Figure 5.5 Real wages versus population in the Netherlands, 1500s–1810s.

given the high wages. High Dutch wages did not produce the abundance of
children that would be expected. Despite these high real living conditions
Dutch fertility rates were seemingly no higher than those in East Asia. Sec-
ond, the high wages in the Netherlands did not reduce mortality as much as
might be expected.

In England, where efficiency gains were modest or nonexistent between
the 1700s and the 1790s, the ability to sustain relatively high real wages must
again stem from unusually low fertility and high mortality.

One factor that helped keep eighteenth-century incomes high in the
Netherlands and England was the increasingly urban character of these soci-
eties. Figure 5.6 shows the percentage of the population in towns in northern
Italy, England, and the Netherlands at fifty-year intervals from 1500 to 1800
(and at hundred-year intervals before that) on the vertical axis compared to
real wages. The observations for each location are linked to show the move-
ment of these urbanization–real wage pairs for each place over time. The fig-
ure shows two things. The first is that in Europe before 1800 real wages and
urbanization were poorly linked, even at the national level. In northern Italy
urbanization was always about 20 percent, even while real wages varied by a

l x ctac   3


50

Netherlands

40

1800s

30

1800s

Northern Italy

20

1800s

10

England

0

0         40         80        120        160        200

Real wage (England 1800s = 100)

Figure 5.6 Urbanization rates, 1300–1800. Urbanization rates for northern Italy from Federico
and Malanima, 2004, table 1. Urbanization rates for the Netherlands and England from de Vries,
1984, 39 (adjusted upward to be comparable to northern Italy).

factor of 2:1. In England in 1400 urbanization rates were less than 5 percent,
even though wages were significantly higher than in 1800, when urbanization
rates were more than 25 percent. Factors other than real wages were driving
urbanization.

The second feature revealed by the figure is that by 1800 the Netherlands
and England were the most urbanized parts of Europe. The evidence from
testators and from parish records is that high urbanization rates helped keep
down fertility and helped drive up death rates, maintaining high incomes. For
example, in late-eighteenth-century England, death rates were about 23 per
thousand in the countryside compared to 43 per thousand in London. The
existence of London alone pushed up the death rate schedule in England by
about 10 percent. Thus the development of trade in the years 1600–1800, which
fostered greater urbanization in metropolitan centers such as those in the
Netherlands and England, also allowed living standards to rise, but by purely
Malthusian mechanisms.

In the Dutch case another factor driving up mortality was colonial ad-
ventures. From 1602 to 1795 the Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie (VOC;

4  chat R 5


the Dutch East Indies Company) recruited about a million men, of whom
half died in service. The annual losses from this service counterbalanced the
half million immigrants drawn by high wages to the Netherlands from else-
where in Europe in the same years. In a society with about the equivalent of
35,000 male births per year, counting immigrants, the VOC was annually
consuming the equivalent of about 5,000 of these! But since these losses were
almost  all men, they also skewed the sex ratio in the Netherlands. In Amster-
dam in 1795 there were 1.3 adult women per adult male. In Delft in 1749 the
ratio of adult women to men was 1.5. The skewed gender ratio drove down
the percentage of women marrying in Dutch cities. Thus the 1829 census re-
vealed that 24 percent of Amsterdam women aged 40–55 had never married.12
Another factor favoring high living standards for Europeans compared to
Asians   is that throughout the preindustrial era Europeans were—by modern
standards and also those of preindustrial China and Japan—a filthy people,
living  in dirt and squalor. The low standards of personal and community
hygiene are everywhere apparent in preindustrial Europe. Indeed the travel
diaries of European visitors to Japan in the years 1543–1811 frequently stressed
the extreme cleanliness of the country by contemporary European standards.13
This is true even in the account of the Dutchman Engelbert Kaempfer, who
resided in Japan in 1690–92, despite the fact that the seventeenth-century

Dutch were reputed to be the most fastidious among the Europeans.14

One crucial economic problem for hygiene in preindustrial Europe was
that human waste had little or no market value, because it was not socially ac-
ceptable to use it as the valuable fertilizer it was for farm and garden purposes.
As Alan Macfarlane notes, “where in Japan, night soil could be used in lieu of
rent, in England one had to pay to have it taken away.”15 Its disposal was thus
a major social problem in Europe. Samuel Pepys, for example, complains in
his diary in October 1660 that “Going down to my cellar . . . I put my feet into
a great heap of turds, by which I find that Mr. Turner’s house of office is full
and comes into my cellar.”16 Neighbors’ overflowing turds were apparently
nothing more than an everyday nuisance in seventeenth-century London!

12. De Vries and van der Woude, 1997, 72–75.

13. Alam, 1987, 238.

14. Schama, 1987, 375–97.

15. Macfarlane, 2003, 173.

16. Pepys, 2000, October 20, 1660. It took five days after this complaint for the neigh-
bor to clean out the overflowing privy.

l x ctac   5


In contrast in China and Japan human waste, urine as well as feces, was
a valuable property which householders sold to farmers, and which various
groups competed for the right to collect. Waste was not dumped into cesspits,
sewers, and streams, contaminating water supplies. Instead in cities such as
eighteenth-century Osaka contractors found it profitable even to provide
public  containers on street corners in order to profit from the waste deposits.17
In China and Japan the waste also seems to have been carried away daily, as
opposed to being stored in cesspits below houses which were only periodi-
cally emptied.

Human waste poses dangers as a fertilizer, but the Japanese at least, aware
of this, stored the waste in pits and tubs for months before use, allowing fer-
mentation the time to destroy many of the infectious organisms.

The Japanese and Chinese also had a more highly developed sense of per-
sonal hygiene. Bathing was not popular in England and indeed was regarded
as an indulgence in the early modern period. Even as late as 1811–17 Jane
Austen’s novels, otherwise full of domestic incident, contain not a single ref-
erence to bathing.18 But in Japan bathing in hot water was popular and fre-
quent. The Chinese also bathed whenever possible, and they employed plenty
of soap.19 The Japanese washed their hands after urinating or defecating, and
they kept privies clean. In the ten years during which Pepys kept his diary,
only once does he mention his wife having a bath: “My wife busy in going
with her woman to the hot house to bathe herself  she now pretends to a

resolution of being hereafter clean. How long it will hold I can guess.” This
bath seems to have indeed been a dramatic event, since he records the next
day, “Lay last night alone, my wife after her bathing lying alone in another
bed.” His newly clean wife seemingly objected to his coming to bed dirty,
since three days later he notes, “at night late home, and to clean myself with
warm water; my wife will have me, because she do herself, and so to bed.”20
But, as Pepys expected, bathing did not become a regular habit and the sub-
ject disappears for the next four years of the diary.

17. Hanley, 1997, 104–29.

18. Dr. Robert Willan, the famous London dermatologist, writing in 1801, noted that
“most men resident in London and many ladies though accustomed to wash their hands and
face daily, neglect washing their bodies from year to year”; quoted in Razzell, 1994, 164.

19. Lee and Feng, 1999, 45.

20. Pepys, 2000, February 21, 22, 25, 1665.

6  chat R 5


Data on soap production in eighteenth-century England support the idea
that washing of people and clothing was not a frequent activity. In the 1710s,
when England’s population was 5.7 million, taxed soap output was 25 million
pounds, less than 0.2 ounce per person per day for all uses of the product.21
To illustrate how meager a use of soap this is, note that the Southern Africa
Food Security Operation currently aims to supply to its destitute clients

0.4 ounce of soap per day, that transported convicts in Australia in the mid-
nineteenth century got a ration of 0.5 ounce of soap per day, and that the ra-
tion of soap for both the Union and Confederate armies at the beginning of
the U.S. Civil War was 0.64 ounce per day.22

The low attention paid by the English to personal hygiene was expressed in
their primitive toilet arrangements. While in Japan toilets were built at some
distance from living quarters, the English upper classes seemed to prefer the
convenience of adjacent toilets, even with the attendant problem of odors.23
Or   they dispensed with toilet arrangements altogether. When the Globe The-
ater was constructed on the south banks of the Thames in London in 1599,
not one toilet was provided for the 1,500 audience members that the theater
could accommodate. Spectators, even those in the 5-pence boxes above the
stage (the equivalent of nearly a day’s wage for a laborer), did their toilet in
the yard outside, or more likely in the stairways and passages of the theater
itself.

Furthermore, in Japan the living spaces were kept much cleaner. Houses
had raised wooden floors, and outside shoes were taken off at the entrance.
The Japanese watered the streets outside their houses to keep dust down. In
contrast in England the majority of people, until quite close to 1800, lived in
dwellings with beaten earth floors covered by rushes that were only infre-
quently renewed. Into these rushes went deposits of waste food, urine, and
spit. Indeed the effluvium deposited on floors from ordinary household busi-
ness was so rich that, when saltpeter men were empowered in the late sixteenth
and early seventeenth centuries to dig out the earth floors as rich sources of
saltpeter (potassium nitrate), they allegedly dug up not just barn floors but
also  the floors of houses. The English also lived with a much more extensive

21. Deane and Cole, 1967, 72.

22. See, for example, Shannon, 1927, 479.

23. Hanley, 1997, 19.

l x ctac   7


domestic menagerie of dogs and cats, who made their own contributions of
fecal material to dwelling spaces and streets.

Thus the relative wealth of the English—expressed also in their compar-
atively greater physical stature then versus now, matched against the Chinese
or Japanese in 1800—probably stemmed mostly from the relative filth in
which they wallowed. For in the Malthusian economy the traditional virtues
of cleanliness and hard work gave no reward to a society at large, and indeed
just made life harder and incomes lower.

Infanticide

Polynesia was a healthy place before Europeans arrived. The climate was mild,
there were no mosquitoes to carry malaria, and the isolation of the islands
protected them from many diseases, such as the plague. The healthiness of
island living shows in the fates of the wives and children of the Bounty mu-
tineers from HMAV Bounty. After the 1789 mutiny Fletcher Christian, eight
other mutineers, and six Tahitian men settled in 1790 with twelve Tahitian
women (some probably kidnapped) on the tiny mischarted island of Pitcairn,
two miles long and one mile wide. By 1800 fourteen of the fifteen men were
dead, twelve having been murdered by their companions and one having
committed suicide.24 But the women had borne 23 children by 1808, all of
whom survived. So that, despite the murderous violence among the men, the
population of 27 in 1790 had grown to 34. By 1823 there were 66 people on
Pitcairn. Thus in one generation the population doubled. By 1856 there were
196 people on Pitcairn, an island with 88 acres of flat land and, by then, a se-
rious population problem.

The healthiness of the Pacific islands is confirmed by the death rates of
European troops stationed abroad in the early nineteenth century, which
are given in table 5.4. The death rates in the table for British and French
troops in the Pacific are lower than those in the same period for troops
stationed in their own countries. Notice also that the death rates for European
troops stationed in tropical Africa or the Caribbean were extremely high in
comparison to the Pacific. Nearly half of British troops stationed in Sierra
Leone in West Africa died each year.

24. Once conflict broke out, there was no retreat for any of the participants, and no one
could sleep soundly at night until he had dispatched his enemies; Nordhoff, 1934.

8  chat R 5


Table 5.4 Healthy and Unhealthy Locations as Evidenced by Troop
Mortality, circa 1800

Troop                Death rate

Location       nationality     Period     per thousand

New Zealand     British       1846–55        9

Tahiti        French       1845–49       10

Cape Colony     British       1818–36       16

Canada       British       1817–36       16

Gibraltar       British       1817–36       21

Bombay       British       1830–38       37

Bengal        British       1830–38       71

Martinique      French      1819–36       112

Jamaica       British       1817–36       130

Senegal       French      1819–38       165

East Indies      Dutch       1819–28       170

Sierra Leone     British       1819–36       483

Source: Curtin, 1989, table 1.1.

Fertility was also probably high among the precontact Polynesians. Sex-
ual activity among women was early and universal. Why then was Tahiti such
an apparent paradise to the visiting English sailors, rather than a society
driven to the very subsistence margin of material income, as in Japan? The
answer seems to be that infanticide was widely practiced before European
Christian missionaries, who first arrived in 1797, changed local practices.25
Unfortunately since our sources on this practice are the missionaries them-
selves,  who had every incentive to portray pre-Christian practices as abhor-
rent, we will never be certain of these reports.26

The estimates from the early nineteenth century are that between two-
thirds and three-quarters of all children born were killed immediately.27 The

25. Oliver, 1974, 424–26.

26. The first Christian mission in Tahiti was not a success, and the missionaries had lim-
ited influence until after 1809, when the social disruption caused by contact with Europeans
led many Tahitians to turn to Christianity.

27. This seems extraordinary, but it is what the missionary accounts record. Captain
James Cook mentions the practice in his journal, but with no estimate of its incidence. The

l x ctac   9


alleged methods used included suffocation, strangulation, and breaking of
the neck. All the observers agree that the act was performed immediately af-
ter birth. If the child lived for any length of time he or she would then be
treated with great care and affection. One sign of the practice of infanticide
was the agreement by most visitors that there were more men than women on
the islands. The reasons for this Tahitian practice are surprisingly unclear.
The paradise of the noble savage seemingly had its savage underside.28

The Europeans may have been a dirty people, but they did have a horror
of infanticide, and there is no evidence of this practice in preindustrial Eu-
rope, either as a deliberate strategy or as the result of differential care for girls
and boys.

But infanticide was common enough in other Malthusian economies
that European abstinence from the practice may indeed be regarded as an
aberration. In both Roman Italy and Roman Egypt parents exposed un-
wanted children in the marketplaces and the streets, though at least some of
these unfortunates were rescued and raised as slaves. In preindustrial China
and Japan the gender ratio of the population shows that there was significant
female infanticide. In these Malthusian economies infanticide did raise living
standards.

The White Death

In 1347, as we have seen, Europe was invaded by a bacterium from the East
that caused the Black Death, which by raising mortality rates increased living
standards in Europe for the next three hundred years. In 1492 when Colum-
bus, perhaps the luckiest man in history, stumbled upon a continent whose
existence he had no right to expect, the local peoples were visited by death
from the West in the form of numerous new diseases. The four major diseases
constituting this White Death were cholera, measles, smallpox, and typhus.
All   these had developed relatively recently under the crowded conditions of
the Eurasian landmass and were novel to the Americas, which had been cut

journals of Captain William Bligh, Sir Joseph Banks, and others contain little information on
infanticide.

28. “I thought I was transported into the garden of Eden  A numerous people there

enjoy the blessings which nature showers liberally down upon them  Every where we found

hospitality, ease, innocent joy, and every appearance of happiness amongst them”; Bougainville,

1772, 228–29, writing of Tahiti in 1768.

  chat R 5


off from contact with Eurasia for millennia. Similarly the inhabitants of Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, and the Pacific islands made acquaintance with these
four diseases and others only with the arrival of Europeans.29

By analogy with the earlier experience of Europeans with the Black Death,
the spread of the White Death to the New World in the years 1492 and later
should have both reduced the native population of the Americas and also
substantially improved living standards for Native Americans. There are some
indications of groups in the New World for whom exposure to European dis-
eases  may have had the expected beneficial effects on living standards. Studies
by Boas in 1892 of Great Plains Indians, who were born mainly between the
1830s and the 1860s, reveal that, despite substantial suffering from exposure to
European diseases such as smallpox, they were very tall by the standards of the
preindustrial world.30 But the bulk of the native populations seemingly de-
rived   no material benefits from contact with European diseases. This would
be  a challenge for the Malthusian model to explain, except that the White
Death was typically accompanied by Europeans expropriating native lands
and resources, thus preventing higher mortality rates from exerting their nor-
mal Malthusian effects.

A Hundred Thousand Years of Stasis?

The Malthusian equilibrium held all societies in its grip before 1800. This
would seem to imply a world of complete economic stasis, at least from the
arrival of settled agriculture eight thousand years ago in the Neolithic Revo-
lution. However, we shall see in the next chapter that there was a surprising
source of dynamism in this Malthusian world. The population was changing,
in ways that have hitherto escaped attention, in at least some of the pre-
industrial economies in the grip of the Malthusian vise. Chapter 6 explores
this change.

29. McNeill, 1976.

30. Steckel and Prince, 2001.

l x ctac   


6  Malthus and Darwin:
Survival of the Richest

Man accumulates property and bequeaths it to his children, so that the children
of the rich have an advantage over the poor in the race for success.

—Charles Darwin (1871)1

As has been emphasized, in the Malthusian era the economic laws that gov-
erned human society were the same as those that govern all animal societies.
Indeed Charles Darwin proclaimed in his autobiography that his inspiration
for On the Origin of Species was Malthus’s Essay on the Principle of Population.2
Then in The Descent of Man Darwin employed his theory of natural selection
to explain how humans evolved from earlier progenitors. He even went so far,
in the conclusion of that work, to endorse the theory that came to be known
as social Darwinism: “Man, like every other animal, has no doubt advanced
to his present high condition through a struggle for existence consequent on
his rapid multiplication; and if he is to advance still higher, it is to be feared
that he must remain subject to a severe struggle.”3

While this affirmation of social Darwinism was misguided, Darwin’s
insight that, as long as population was regulated by Malthusian mechanisms,
mankind would be subject to natural selection was profoundly correct.

In the Malthusian era on average every woman could have only two sur-
viving offspring. But these two had to be selected by some mechanism from
the average of four or five children each women had in the preindustrial era.
And as long as mothers and fathers varied in their characteristics this survival
process favored some types of individuals over others. The Darwinian struggle

1. Darwin, 1998, 139.

2. Darwin, 1969.

3. Darwin, 1998, 642.

2


that shaped human nature did not end with the Neolithic Revolution but con-
tinued right up to 1800.

In this chapter we will see that there is very good evidence of differential
survival of types in preindustrial England in the years 1250–1800. In particu-
lar economic success translated powerfully into reproductive success, with the
richest individuals having more than twice the number of surviving children
at death as the poorest.

Indeed the evidence is that the poorest individuals in the Malthusian era
would typically not reproduce themselves at all. Instead preindustrial En-
gland was a world of constant downward mobility. Given the static nature of
the economy and of the opportunities it afforded, the abundant children of the
rich had to, on average, move down the social hierarchy. The craftsmen of
one generation supplied many of the laborers of the next, merchants’ sons be-
came the petty traders, large landowners’ sons ended up as the smallholders.
The downward nature of social mobility in the Malthusian era is in stark
contrast to the modern world, in which the lower fertility of the rich for most
of the years since 1870, and the expansion of upper-level economic opportu-
nities, have created a world of constant upward mobility, in which parents on

average see their children move up the social hierarchy.

Survival of the Richest

The first two basic Malthusian propositions, shown again in figure 6.1, imply
that reproductive success, the number of offspring a person leaves on his or
her death, increases with income. This curve is drawn for society as a whole.
But within any settled agrarian society there are huge variations in income
across families at any time. The existence of land and capital as assets that
generate rents allows some individuals to command much greater shares of
output than others. The same Malthusian logic thus implies that those who
are successful in economic competition in settled agrarian societies, those
who acquire and hold more property, or develop skills that allow for higher
wages, would also be more successful reproductively.

The wills of the men in England discussed in chapter 4 seem, at least by
1585, to mention nearly all surviving children. One way this can be demon-
strated is through the ratio of sons to daughters. Daughters were much more
likely than sons to be excluded from wills, because they had married and were
given their share of the inheritance in dowry or because they were simply given

alth US A  a Rw   3


Birth rate

B*=D*

Death rate

y*

Income per person

Figure 6. Birth rate and death rate schedules.

no bequest. John Hynson of Fordham, Cambridge, left to his two unmarried
daughters Margaret and Mary £30 each. His three married daughters, whose
names were not even given, were described thus: “To my 3 daughters who are
married 10s [£0.5] each.” Even bequests to unmarried daughters were gener-
ally smaller. For example, John Pratt of Cheveley, Cambridge, left each son £5,
but each daughter only £2.4

Hence the ratio of boys to girls named in wills can be used as a measure
of how many daughters were omitted. The expected ratio will be 1.03 if boys
and girls had equal chances of being mentioned in wills.5 The actual ratio, as
table 6.1 shows, averaged 1.04. Probably only 1 percent more girls than boys
are omitted from these wills. But given that girls were so much more likely to
be excluded, if anyone was, the overall omission rate for children must have
been very low.

4. Evans, 1993, 108, 217.

5. Based on estimated relative male and female mortality rates by age in 1580–1649;
Wrigley et al., 1997, 296, 303.

4  chat R 6


Table 6. Surviving Children per Male Testator in England, 1585–1638

Number of
wills with

information   Children per   Sons per     Ratio
Location   on children     testator     testator    sons/daughters

London       177       1.96       0.83       0.77

Towns       344       2.39       1.19       1.02

Rural       2,210       2.92       1.50       1.06

Total      2,731       2.79       1.42       1.04

Source: Clark and Hamilton, 2006.

We can thus use these wills to investigate the connection between wealth
and reproductive success in preindustrial England. Since we are interested
in the reproductive success of testators, dead children were counted as sur-
viving offspring if they themselves had produced living offspring. Thus
William Cooke of Great Livermere in Suffolk, who died at about age 74, left
four living children, but also two dead sons who each had two surviving chil-
dren.6 He was counted as having six children.

As can be seen in table 6.1 the average numbers of children per testator
were modest. For a population to be just reproducing itself the numbers of
children surviving each male at time of death would have to exceed two. This
is  so because some of these children would be minors who would die before
they would reach the age (16 or more) at which they would potentially be
writing wills. For the average testator in our sample to have two children
who survived at least to age 16, he would need to have left 2.07 children when
he died. Thus London testators circa 1620 were definitely not reproducing
themselves. Those outside London in smaller towns, with 2.39 surviving
children per testator, were experiencing a population growth of less than 15
percent per generation. Rural testators, however, were growing by 40 percent
per generation.

Figure 6.2 shows the estimated numbers of children per male of each of
eight bequest classes revealed by the wills. The bottom four income groups

6. Evans, 1987, 359.

alth US A  a Rw   5


5

4

Replacement fertility

3

2

1

0

0-9     10-24    25-49    50-99    100-249   250-499   500-999   1,000+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 6.2 Surviving children by assets of the testator.

cover the bottom half of testators. Someone with less than £25 in bequests
would typically have fewer than two children, while someone with £1,000 or
more would typically have more than four children. The link between wealth
and surviving children was thus extremely strong.7

The link shown here between wealth and children cannot be an artifact
created by poorer testators omitting some children because they had nothing
to bequeath them. This is evident in a number of ways. We know, for example,
from the work of Anthony Wrigley and his associates that the typical male
testator in England in these years would leave 2.58 surviving children.8 So the
richest testators with more than four children per family must have been pro-
ducing substantially more surviving children than the general population,
and by inference than the poorest testators as well. In addition the frequency
of either no child being named as an heir or no male heir being named was
higher for the poor. Even if poorer testators omitted some children from their

7. Given that the wealth of testators can be inferred from the wills only with a large
amount of error, the true relationship between wealth and children is most likely even stronger
than what is shown in the figure.

8. Wrigley et al., 1997, 614.

6  chat R 6


wills because they had few assets, or chose to leave everything to one child,
they would certainly not omit all their children for this reason. Furthermore,
given the preference for males as heirs, while they might have left assets only
to the oldest son, they would not have omitted all their surviving sons from
a will.9 Poorer men simply had very few surviving children at the time of their
deaths.

Interestingly wealth predicted reproductive success much better than so-
cial status or literacy. Economic status rather than social class is what mattered
for reproductive success in England in these years. Presumably this was because
the occupational labels used to form people into status classes were imprecise.
There were husbandmen who were literate and wealthier than yeomen who
were illiterate. There were carpenters who worked for others and owned noth-
ing, and there were carpenters who were employers and engaged in building
and leasing property.

It could be that economic success was an idiosyncratic element, created
by luck or by personality factors that were nonheritable. In this case, while
survival of the richest would have the social consequences illustrated below, it
would have no long-run effects on the characteristics of the population.

However, the children of the rich had one significant advantage over those
of the poor: the significant amount they inherited from their parents. One
thing that stands out in these wills is that the major concern of the writers
was to ensure that their assets passed to their biological children, and absent
these to others genetically related to them: nephews, nieces, brothers, sisters,
or cousins. Where wives were young enough to have children by another hus-
band the fear was that the children of another man would benefit from the
testators’ assets. Wives were sometimes forbidden to remarry, or were required
to surrender bequests on remarriage. Even though the early seventeenth cen-
tury was a time of relatively heightened religiosity, and in fact the wills came
from an area of England which produced many of the early Puritan settlers in
New England, the amounts bequeathed to the poor were extremely small.
Little also was left to the many servants the rich would have. Figure 6.3 illus-
trates the dominance of transmission of assets to those genetically related to
the testator.10 Bequests to the poor were typically less than 0.5 percent of the

9. Clark and Hamilton, 2006, give the evidence for this assertion.

10. Wives were counted as genetically related since the assets bequeathed to them were
typically to raise children, or would pass on to children on their deaths.

alth US A  a Rw   7


15

Poor

12

Not genetically related

9

6

3

0

0-9    10-24    25-49    50-99   100-249   250-499   500-999   1,000+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 6.3 Share of bequests to the poor and those not genetically related by size of
bequest.

testator’s wealth. Bequests to those not genetically related were between 1 and
12 percent. The greater frequency of such bequests by poorer testators prob-
ably reflects the fact that they more often had no genetic relatives to whom to
leave property.

Thus the sons of the rich would typically end up inheriting, counting the
dowry their brides would bring, about half their fathers’ bequests. They
started life with an advantage over the children of poor men. And there is ev-
idence that they too were more successful reproductively.

The first piece of this evidence is the number of grandchildren men-
tioned in the wills of richer and poorer testators. Only some grandchildren
were mentioned in these wills. But if omissions were equally likely for the
poor as for the rich, then, if the children inherited some of the reproductive
success of their parents, the ratio of grandchildren to children should be
greater for the children of the wealthy. If there was no inheritance of repro-
ductive advantage the ratio should be the same for the children of the rich
and the poor. Figure 6.4 shows this ratio for a subsample of the wills. It is
clearly higher for the children of the rich. However it is only about 50 percent

8  chat R 6


0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0-9    10-24    25-49    50-99   100-249   250-499   500-999   1,000+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 6.4 Grandchildren per child by bequest class.

higher for the children of the two richest groups of testators than for the chil-
dren of the poorest. So clearly this advantage is not perfectly heritable, or this
ratio would have been close to double for these groups.

A second check on the heritability of these differences in reproductive
success is to look at the correlation of wealth between fathers and sons, since
the size of the bequest is so closely linked to reproductive success. Figure 6.5
shows this relationship for 147 father-son pairs, where the bequest size has
been transformed into units roughly equivalent to the intervals used in figures

6.2 and 6.3. Clearly there was a correlation between the wealth of fathers and
sons when they both left wills. Rich fathers tended to have rich sons and vice
versa. The dotted line shows the best fit of the relationship.

There are some problems with these data that limit what they can demon-
strate, since the chances of a man making a will were much greater if he had
a larger bequest to make. But if that was all that was happening we would ex-
pect poorer fathers, for example, those who left less than £100, to have sig-
nificantly richer sons in cases where their sons left wills. In practice the twenty
poorest fathers in this group, whose average bequest was only £51, left sons

alth US A  a Rw   9


10

8

6

4

2

0

0         2         4         6         8         10

Wealth class of fathers

Figure 6.5 Bequests of the father and of the son. The bequest measure here is ln(1 + bequest).

whose average bequest was just slightly higher at £123. The correlation between
fathers and sons cannot be purely from such selection. Economic status was
indeed inherited.

The information from these linked father-son pairs also suggests that the
advantage the sons had in accumulating wealth was not purely, or even
largely, from the bequests they received. The number of children the 72 fathers
had at time of death varied from one to eleven. If the advantage of the sons
lay only in the bequests they received, then sons from large families should
have done much less well than their fathers. The assets in such cases would
have been dissipated among many children. In fact the number of brothers
and sisters had little influence on how rich sons were at death. Fathers rich at
the time of their deaths tended to have sons who were also rich at the time of
their deaths, even when the sons received a small share of the fathers’ wealth
because there were many surviving children. The principal advantages the fa-
thers were transmitting to their sons were thus either cultural (the sons
learned how to succeed economically) or even genetic (the sons shared innate
characteristics with their fathers that made them economically successful).

There is evidence that the pattern uncovered here, of much higher net
fertility by richer groups, existed in England at least by 1250. Medieval kings

2  chat R 6


2.5


2.0

Royal tenants

1.5

1.0


0.5

All men

0.0

1250          1350          1450          1550          1650

Figure 6.6 Sons per testator, 1250–1650. Data from Clark and Hamilton, 2006, 733.

had a financial interest in the deaths of their tenants in chief, those who held
land directly from the crown under the feudal system. These individuals were
mostly an economically privileged group, and they included the highest no-
bility of the land. Thus from 1250 on the king’s officials conducted inquisi-
tiones post-mortem on the deaths of these tenants, which are preserved in the
Public Record Office. These inquisitions, however, record only the following
information about surviving children: the oldest surviving son or his descen-
dants   or, failing a male heir, all daughters or their descendants.

The evidence of the wills in 1585–1638 provides a way to infer total num-
bers of surviving children from measures such as the fraction of times there
was an heir, or the fraction of times there was a male heir, for wealthy groups
such as royal tenants before 1500. Figure 6.6 shows two series by decade from
the 1250s to the 1640s. The first is the average number of males per adult in-
ferred for the whole population of England by decade from data on the ag-
gregate movement of the population. As can be seen, except for the phase of
population growth up to 1315, this number before 1500 was 1 or below 1. The
second  is the implied average number of adult male children produced by
royal tenants. This was calculated by using the proportions revealed for 1585–
1638 between total male surviving children and the fraction of testators leaving
a son or leaving some child.

alth US A  a Rw   2


Table 6.2

Demography of English Aristocrats, 1330–1829

Net    Male life   Male life    Fraction
replacement   expectancy   expectancy   of deaths

Period        rate      at birth      at 20     from violence

1330–1479      —       24.0      21.7        26

1480–1679     1.04       27.0      26.3        11

1680–1729     0.80       33.0      30.0        7

1730–1779     1.51       44.8      39.9        3

1780–1829     1.52       47.8      42.7        4

Source: Hollingsworth, 1965, 8–11.

Note: Hollingsworth considers only legitimate children, but he argues that illegitimate children
were few, less than 10 percent of these totals.

In the two periods in medieval England during which the population was
stable or growing, 1250–1349 and 1450–1500, tenants in chief were producing
an average of 1.8 surviving sons, nearly double the average for the population
as a whole. Even in the years of population decline from 1350 to 1450, though
the number of implied surviving sons per tenant in chief declined, it remained
at or above the replacement rate in most decades. Thus, as later in medieval
England, the rich seem to have been out-reproducing the poor.

In England the reproductive success of the class that engaged in warfare
on a large scale in the preindustrial era, the aristocracy, was much poorer than
for economically successful commoners, and it was probably less than that of
the average person. Table 6.2 shows for the English aristocracy (kings, dukes,
and duchesses) the net reproduction rate, as well as life expectancy at birth for
males by period from 1330 (when dukes were first created). Medieval manorial
tenants, for example, had a life expectancy at age 20 of about 30, compared to
about 22 for the aristocracy.11

These excess deaths at relatively young ages contributed to the low net
fertility of aristocrats. Thus in the earliest period for which we observe fertil-
ity, 1480–1679, the aristocracy, despite its privileged social position, was barely
reproducing itself. Only after 1730, when death rates from violence declined
to   levels not much above those for the general population, did aristocratic life

11. Razi, 1980, 130.

22  chat R 6


60

Farm laborer's income

50

Birth rate

40

30

20                                        Death rate

10

0

0       25       50       75       100       125       150

Annual family income (£)

Figure 6.7 Birth rate and death rate schedules in England, circa 1630.

expectancy come to exceed that of the average person. And it was only in this
latter period that aristocrats finally enjoyed more reproductive success than the
average person.

Thus from the earliest times we can observe in the preindustrial era repro-
ductive success in a settled agrarian economy like England seemingly went to
those who succeeded in the economic sphere and avoided occupations in which
violent death was a hazard. Ever since the arrival of institutionally stable agrar-
ian societies, with private ownership of land and capital, and secure transmis-
sion of assets between generations, those who were economically successful—
and in particular those who accumulated assets—were likely also reproductively
successful.

The Malthusian Scissors

The data from the wills on wealth and occupations, combined with informa-
tion from parish registers, allow us to portray the birth rate and death rate
schedules of seventeenth-century England as a function of income over a large
range  of the income distribution, though excluding the very poorest families.

alth US A  a Rw   23


Income for each testator was calculated as his likely wage income from his oc-
cupation, combined with asset income. Figure 6.7 shows these curves for
England around 1630. The Malthusian “scissors” are evident. At the income
level of a farm laborer, the birth rate barely exceeded the death rate. Implied
birth rates are low for the preindustrial era, at 29 per thousand. For those in
the highest-income group, with average implied incomes of about £150 per
family per year, more than five times the national average, implied birth rates
were nearly 50 per thousand, close to the highest levels observed for prein-
dustrial populations as a whole. Since the implied death rate of this high-in-
come group was only 24 per thousand, the implied population growth rate of
this group was nearly 2.6 percent per year.

Thus there is no sign that even preindustrial England in the period 1600–
1800 had escaped the grip of the Malthusian trap. The curves displayed in fig-
ure 6.3 imply that any significant increase in average incomes would have led
immediately to rapid population growth.

Sources of Mortality

The likelihood that reproductive success was determined by very different
means in settled, institutionally stable agrarian societies than in hunter-
gatherer and shifting cultivation communities is reinforced by studies of mor-
tality in modern forager and nonmarket societies. These suggest that deaths
from accidents—to use the old legal terminology, deaths from misadventure—
and homicide formed a surprisingly high proportion of all deaths compared
to settled agrarian societies, and to modern societies.

This was partly due to the way of life in early societies. In the mobile
forager societies there were heightened risks of death from encounters with
dangerous animals, drowning, thirst, and falls. But homicide was an even more
common killer than such accidents. Despite romantic notions of the noble
savage, violent conflict within and between bands of foragers seems to be
frequent.

Table 6.3 shows for some modern hunter-gatherer societies the male
death rates per thousand males per year overall and from accidents and homi-
cide. Forager societies for which we have a complete breakdown of causes of
death are few. And the small size of these groups implied much random vari-
ation in the causes of death in the observation periods. But these observations

24  chat R 6


Table 6.3 Causes of Male Deaths in Forager and Subsistence Societies

Death rate (per thousand)

Group                Overall    Accident    Homicide

Neolithic France, 5500–2200 BCa      —       —       1.4

Ache, forest period, 1900–70b        27      3.5      15.0

Yanomamo, 1970–74b             —       2.1       3.6

!Kung, before 1973b              32      4.4

New Guinea (Gebusi)c             —       0.6       6.9

New Guinea (Goilala, Hewa)c         —       —       6.6*
Agtac                      42       —       3.3*

United Kingdom, 1999d            12       —       0.01

United States, 1999d              12       —       0.07

Sources: aGuilaine and Zammit, 2005, 133, 241–49 (very rough estimate). bHill and Hurtado,

1996, 174. cKnauft, 1987. dWorld Health Organization, 2002, table A.8.

Note: * denotes male and female deaths.

suggest that homicide, including intergroup conflicts, was the source of death
for 7–55 percent of men in such communities, averaging 21 percent of deaths.
The reason for these high rates of violent death among men in forager soci-
eties is not clear. In part it may stem from the absence of supervening legal
authorities which could settle disputes without resort to violence. But we
shall  see that there is also the possibility that the people of long-established
forager societies were inherently, maybe even genetically, more violent.

Jean Guilaine and Jean Zammit estimate the numbers of people who
died violently in Neolithic France from skeletal evidence. Figure 6.8 shows the
kind of graphic evidence of violence that can be found in skeletal remains.
Though there must be many caveats about their estimate, they conclude that
3 percent of the dead were killed or injured by violence. Assuming, based on
their appendix tables, that the ratio of killed to injured was 2:1, that these
were all male, and that life expectancy was 35 at birth gives the estimate in the
table, 1.4 deaths per thousand from homicide. This suggests a rate much
lower than that for modern foragers, but much higher than that for modern
high-income societies.

alth US A  a Rw   25


Figure 6.8 Copper dagger blade lodged in a vertebra, third millennium BC.

In most modern societies deaths from violence occur at a low rate. In typ-
ical modern western European societies, such as the United Kingdom, the
rate of male deaths from violence is only 0.01–0.02 per thousand per year.
There seemingly was a transition from early societies, in which interpersonal
violence was a major contributor to death rates, to modern ones, in which vio-
lence  is not an important source of mortality. When did that transition occur?
In England we can trace sources of mortality all the way back to the late
twelfth century. Since in medieval England the property of anyone who killed
unlawfully reverted to the king, the king had an incentive to discover all mur-
ders. English kings thus established early on a system of coroners’ inquests for
all accidental and violent deaths. These inquests establish the numbers of
homicides and accidental deaths per year for various counties in England

back to the late twelfth century.12

Figure 6.9 shows the trend in these various local estimates of homicide
rates as well as later national homicide rates, per thousand people. Though
there was a steady decline in homicide rates between 1200 and 1800, medieval
England was already very peaceable compared to modern forager societies.
Death rates per year from unorganized violence in England even circa 1200
averaged 0.2 per thousand. But this figure shows only the toll from unorgan-
ized violence. War deaths, the result of organized violence, must be added in
to arrive at the overall losses from homicide.

12. Hair, 1971; Hanawalt, 1976, 1979; Cockburn, 1977, 1991; Given 1977.

26  chat R 6


0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1


0.0

1200    1300    1400    1500    1600    1700    1800    1900

Figure 6.9 Homicide rates for males in England, 1190s–2000.

2000

Figure 6.10 shows estimated English male death rates from the various ex-
ternal and internal wars by decade from the 1170s to the 1900s.13 Here the
average losses were surprisingly small, of the order of 0.12–0.15 per thousand
people for most of the period 1150–1800. Thus even in medieval England be-
fore 1350 the average annual death rate from all violence was 0.4 per thou-
sand. Even allowing for the fact that the death rates for forager societies were
calculated for men, this is an order of magnitude less than the rate currently
observed for forager societies. It is also less than the estimated Neolithic rate.
Early European wars produced few casualties because the size of armies
before 1700 was typically small. In the 1290s, when Edward I assembled the
largest armies of his long reign, before he was severely constrained by finan-
cial problems, his army to suppress the Welsh rebellion of 1294–95 was 31,000
at its maximum. This was about 0.6 percent of the English population. When
the locus of the fighting switched to France during the Hundred Years War,
the size of armies was even smaller because of the development of more pro-
fessional and better-equipped forces, and the cost of moving troops to France.

13. There is a good historical record of all the battles and campaigns of the English, many
with casualty estimates. For the earlier battles casualty numbers were estimated from those con-
flicts for which a count was available.

alth US A  a Rw   27


2.0

Wars of the Roses

1.5

Civil War

1.0

0.5


0.0

1050    1150    1250    1350    1450    1550

Decade

1650   1750

1850

Figure 6. Death rates from military conflicts in England, 1170s–1900s. The line shows a fifty-
year moving average of combat death rates in England.

When Henry V invaded France in 1415 he had only about 10,000 men. And
casualties from violence in war were limited because battles were infrequent
and the battles themselves did not always produce large numbers of casualties.
Edward I, who reigned for thirty-five years from 1272 to 1307, and who led
armies in Wales, Scotland, Flanders, and the Holy Land, took part in only one
full-scale battle, at Falkirk in Scotland in 1298.14 Thus one reason that forager
living standards were probably as high as those in Europe by the eighteenth
century was the relatively low rates of death from violence in these settled
agrarian economies—though England was a particularly stable and peaceable
preindustrial society.

Reproductive Success in Earlier Societies

The Malthusian assumptions imply that in all societies those who command
more income will have greater reproductive success. We shall soon see, when
we look at preindustrial China and Japan, that this relationship may have been

14. Prestwich, 1996, 116–18, 305–11.

28  chat R 6


particularly strong for England. Yet it seems probable, given the Malthusian
model, that such a connection existed in all settled, institutionally stable agrar-
ian economies before 1800. In these environments men could more effectively
translate income into reproductive advantage.

Thus anthropologists have demonstrated that among pastoralists in mod-
ern Kenya ownership of cattle correlates strongly with reproductive success
through marrying more and younger wives.15 The Ache of Paraguay, hunter-
gatherers, moved every day in search of game, so property ownership was
minimal, limited to what a person could carry. Reproductive success in this
group was still correlated with economic success. But it was the success of males
in bringing meat into camp each day. All the adult males hunted, and Ache
hunters who brought home more meat had higher fertilities. The most suc-
cessful hunters at the mean age of 32 had 0.31 children per year compared to

0.20 for the least successful. Survival rates were about the same for the chil-
dren of successful and unsuccessful hunters.16

But some of the mechanisms by which people commanded more income
seem to have been very different in hunter-gatherer societies than in the set-
tled agrarian economies that preceded the Industrial Revolution.

As we saw for the case of the upper classes in England, violence was not
a successful reproductive strategy. Rates of violent death were very low. This
finding contrasts with conditions in modern hunter-gatherer or shifting cul-
tivation societies in which accidents and violence are a much more important
source of mortality. There mortality rates from accidents and violence for
males were typically 3–18 per thousand males per year. At the extreme, among
the Ache violence was the cause of most male deaths.

In these societies violence was a way of gaining more resources and hence
more reproductive success. Thus Napoleon Chagnon, in a famous study of
the warlike Yanomamo society, found that a major predictor of reproductive
success was having killed someone. Male Yanomamo sired more children at a
given age if they had murdered someone than if they had not.17 Table 6.4
shows the numbers of children male Yanomamo had fathered as a function of
age and of their status as killers or nonkillers.

15. Borgerhoff-Mulder, 1987; Cronk, 1991.

16. Hill and Hurtado, 1996, 316–17.

17. Of course this raises the question of whether murder is a successful reproductive strat-
egy for males, since some of those who fail in the attempt will die themselves.

alth US A  a Rw   29


Table 6.4 Reproductive Success of Male Yanomamo, 1987

Killers’              Nonkillers’

Number of     average     Number of     average
Age       killers      offspring     nonkillers     offspring

20–24       5        1.00        78        0.18

25–30       14        1.57        58        0.86

31–40       43        2.83        61        2.02

41+        75        6.99        46        4.19

Source: Chagnon, 1988.

Social Mobility with Survival of the Richest

England in the years 1585–1638 was still a relatively static society, with little
change in income per person. It was, as noted, a society still in the grip of the
Malthusian Trap, in which economic change was slow or nonexistent. Con-
sequently the relative numbers of occupations, the wage rates for different
occupations, and the stock of housing per person changed little. The amount
of   land per person fell, but land values were increasing with the growth of
the population, so the value of land per person also changed little. The great
reproductive success of richer testators thus meant that their children were on
average moving down the social ladder in terms of wealth and occupations—
and moving down reasonably rapidly.

Table 6.5 illustrates this for Suffolk in 1620–38. The second column of
the table shows the sample of males from Suffolk who made wills, arranged
by wealth class. Added to the observed wills are the appropriately sized group
of males who made no will, assumed to have zero assets, as well as an appro-
priately sized group of testators whose wills were approved in higher courts
and whose wealth is assumed to have exceeded £1,000. The next column shows
the share of each class of males in the population in the first generation. The
next column gives the observed numbers of male children from each asset
class who reach at least age 16. We assume those who did not make wills had
the same numbers of children as those making wills whose assets were £0–9.
For those whose wills were proved in higher courts we assume they had the
same numbers of children as those of the highest observed asset class. This
implies that of a population of 3,613 wills in the first generation we end up
with 4,266 adult male successors in the next generation, an increase of 18 per-

3  chat R 6


Table 6.5 Intergenerational Mobility in Suffolk, 1620–38

Share of             Share of

Males in      first       Male      second
first      generation     adult     generation

Assets      generation      (%)      children      (%)

0 (no will)     2,204       61.0      (2,125)       49.8

0–10         140        3.9       135        3.2

500–999       116        3.2       220        5.2

1,000+        168        4.7       338        7.9

All         3,613       100       4,266      100

Source: Clark and Hamilton, 2006.

Note: The number in parentheses in column 4 is an estimate from the observed reproductive
success of the highest and lowest group of those who made wills in the archdeaconry courts.

cent per generation. This is close to the 21 percent gain per generation found
by Wrigley et al. for England in this period.

The last column of the table shows the shares of the children of each
wealth class in the next generation. Testators with wealth of less than £10 and
those who left no will were 65 percent of the first generation. But their sons
constituted only 53 percent of the next generation. Testators with wealth of
more than £500 were 8 percent of the initial generation. Their sons were 13
percent of the next generation. Given that wealth per person probably stayed
constant over this interval, there must have been considerable net downward
mobility in the population. Nearly half of the sons of higher-class testators
would end up in a lower wealth class at death. Indeed net mobility would be
downward for testators in all the groups with a wealth of £25 or more.

Zvi Razi’s evidence from the court rolls of Halesowen for 1270–1348 is
consistent with the suggestion of the inquisitiones post-mortem that the rich
were much more successful in reproducing themselves in medieval England.
Table 6.6 shows the percentage of families showing up in the court rolls of
1270–82 who had direct descendants holding land in the manor in 1348. All
the families with the largest holdings in 1270–82 still had direct descendants
holding land. But only 25 of the 70 families holding the smallest amounts of
land had a descendant holding land.

However, the distribution of the sizes of these holdings had not become
more unequal. Families with larger holdings in 1270–82 on net acquired more

alth US A  a Rw   3


Table 6.6 Survival of Landowners in Halesowen, 1270–1348

Family               Number with       Percentage with
type in     Numbers    descendants holding    descendants holding
1270–82    of families      land in 1348       land in 1348

Rich        40          40            100

Middling      64          58             91

Poor        70          25             36

All         174          123            —

Source: Razi, 1981, 5.

land. But they also often had more heirs, and so divided up their holdings
more often between multiple heirs, keeping the overall land size distribution
in balance. Since Ravi’s data do not allow us to know whether the small land-
holders were in fact suffering demographic collapse, or whether they simply
either disappeared from the court rolls or left the manor, the data do not
demonstrate that medieval England was experiencing the same population
dynamics as occurred in later years.18 But they are consistent with that
interpretation.

This story of the reproductive advantage of the rich is also found in a
collection assembled by Joerg Baten of surveys of communicants in villages
in Austria and southern Germany for the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries.
Villagers of higher social status and those revealed to be more likely literate
had at the time of the surveys more surviving children.19

Thus economic orientation had a dynamic of its own in the static Mal-
thusian economy. Middle-class values, and economic orientation, were most
likely being spread through reproductive advantage across all sections of sta-
ble agrarian societies. The next two chapters consider the dynamic elements
of the economy before 1800. Chapter 7 examines technological advance, and
chapter 8 explores the implications of these Darwinian selection processes for
people’s economic behaviors.

18. Inhabitants without land were less likely to appear in court rolls since they do not
show up in land transactions or as pledges.

19. Joerg Baten, personal communication.

32  chat R 6


7  Technological Advance

There be dayly many things found out, and dayly more may be which our Fore-
fathers never knew to be possible in Nature.

—Sir Robert Filmer (1653)1

Despite the sluggishness of preindustrial technological advance, there was over
time—agonizingly slowly, incrementally—significant technological progress.
Europe of 1800 was technologically significantly advanced over Europe of 1300.
And Europe of 1300, surprisingly, had a much better technology than the
ancient Romans or Greeks. Even the supposedly technologically stagnant eras
of the Dark Ages and the Middle Ages saw many innovations.2

Thus the list of basic technologies which were unknown or unused in
the ancient world is surprisingly long. None of the Babylonians, Egyptians,
Persians, Greeks, or Romans, for example, managed to discover the stirrup
for horse riders, simple as this device seems. Ancient horse riders held on
with their knees. The stirrup was introduced in China only in the third cen-
tury AD, and in Europe not until the early Middle Ages.3 The Romans and
Greeks also used horse harnesses which wound around the belly and neck of
the horse. Experiments in the early twentieth century by a retired French
cavalry officer, Richard Lefebvre de Noëttes, suggest that horses harnessed
in this way lose up to 80 percent of their traction power, since the neck strap

1. Filmer, 1653, 8.

2. Many of these same innovations were made earlier and independently in China.

3. Temple, 1986, 89–90. Lynn White, 1962, famously argued that the introduction of the
stirrup to western Europe in the ninth century led to the dominance of the heavily armored
knight in warfare.

33


compresses both the windpipe and the jugular vein. Only in the eighth cen-
tury in Europe were efficient harnesses, which sit on horses’ shoulders, dis-
covered.4 Horseshoes to protect hooves were also unknown in the Roman and
Greek world.

Looking just at Europe, the Greeks and Romans also lacked windmills
(first documented in Yorkshire, England, in 1185), buttons for clothing (first
found in Germany, 1230s), spinning wheels (France, by 1268), mechanical
clocks (England, 1283), spectacles (Italy, 1285), firearms (Spain, 1331), and
movable-type printing (Germany, 1453).5 Though the Romans had learned
how    to make at least primitive soaps, it was not used for cleaning bodies. That
was accomplished by rubbing oil onto the body and removing it with a
scraper. A Swedish windmill, the successor to a medieval innovation, is shown
in figure 7.1.

Similarly China between AD 1 and 1400 saw the introduction of porce-
lain, matches, woodblock printing, movable-type printing, paper money, and
spinning wheels.6 The technology of the preindustrial world was not com-
pletely static.

What was the rate of improvement of technology compared to the mod-
ern world? And how did it vary over time? Can we reduce all the complex
changes in technology to a single number, the rate of advance of technology
per year? How do we compare the invention of the bow for hunting, for ex-
ample, with the introduction of the personal computer? How much techno-
logical progress is represented by the introduction of the mechanical clock in
Europe in 1285, compared to the knitting frame of 1589?

Economists measure the rate of technological advance in a particular
way. The lower curve in figure 7.2 shows the typical preindustrial connection
between land per person and output per person, the production function of
the society. Technological change in this measure is an upward shift in the
production possibilities at any given amount of land per person, again shown
in  figure 7.2. If A is the measure of the level of technology, the rate of tech-
nological advance, gA, is the percentage upward movement per year of the

production function at any given amount of land per person. For example,

4. Mokyr, 1990, 36. Again such harnesses are claimed to have appeared in China much
earlier, before 300 BC; Temple, 1986, 20–21.

5. Mokyr, 1990, 31–56.

6. Temple, 1986, 75–122.

34  chat R 7


Figure 7. A windmill, unknown in the world
of Plato, Aristotle, and Euclid but introduced
in the Middle Ages (Faro, northern Gotland,
Sweden).

if gA is 1 percent per year, at a given land-labor ratio the society is able to
produce 1 percent more output per year.

This measure of the rate of technological advance has the property that

gA = θ1gA1 + θ2 gA2 +   + θngA ,

where the θs are the values of the output of each industry of the economy di-
vided by the total value of the final outputs, and the g s are the growth rates

i

of efficiency within each industry.

Economists use this weighting because it measures how much technical
changes matter to the average consumer. It measures efficiency by looking at
the changes in the efficiency of production of each good within the economy
weighted by how much of each good is consumed. This productivity measure
effectively takes a poll of consumers and asks “How much more efficiently are
things being done for you this year as opposed to last year?”

tchol o G cal a vac   35


y*


Figure 7.2

Land per person

Effects of technological advance before 1800.

Measuring Technological Advance from Population

In figure 7.2 the Malthusian mechanism stabilizes population at the level at
which the land per person produces just the subsistence income y*. Techno-
logical change in this world showed up as an upward shift in the production
possibilities.7 But as long as income was constrained to return to the subsis-
tence level, y*, population would grow after technological advance until land
per person fell sufficiently so that output per person was again y*.

For one preindustrial society we can actually plot this curve over a wide
range of acres per person. That is England during the period 1240–1600,
when production technology seems to have been static but population varied
by a factor of nearly 3 because of losses from the plague after 1348. The data
points in figure 7.3 show output per person for each decade from the 1240s to

7. Here technology is used in the broadest possible sense to include any element of in-
vention or social organization that affects output per acre. Thus legal innovations that increase
output through better defining property rights will be included in the technology of a given
period.

36  chat R 7


100

80

60

40

20

0

0      2      4      6      8      10      12      14

Acres per person

Figure 7.3 Output per person versus land per person in England, 1240s–1590s.

the 1590s. Also shown is the single production function that best fits these
data. The static nature of the technology over these years is well illustrated by
how well this single curve fits all these observations.

If we can represent aggregate technological advance in this way, as the up-
ward shift in the production function, then measuring technological advance
over long periods using population data becomes easy.

Let N be population and gN the population growth rate. If c is the share

of land rents in income in preindustrial society, then

g = (—1 )g .

The detailed derivation of this relationship is provided in the technical
appendix.

This simple formula says, for example, that if the share of land rents in
income was one-fifth, then a 1 percent improvement in the technology will
increase population by 5 percent. To use this formula to measure the rate of
preindustrial technological advance all we need is some estimate of the share
of land rents in all sources of income and of the rate of population growth.

tchol o G cal a vac   37


1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1200      1300      1400      1500      1600      1700      1800

Figure 7.4 Land rents as a share of all income in England, 1200–1800.

Preindustrial England again supplies estimates of the share of land rents
in national income all the way from 1200 to 1800. Figure 7.4 shows this share
by decade. Though the share varied somewhat it was remarkably stable over
time at an average of 20 percent of income. The constancy of the share of rent
in all income allows us to infer simply how much technological progress
would change the population. (To be precise, the production function is
Cobb-Douglass.)

In preindustrial England the rent share in agriculture (as opposed to the
economy as a whole) was 30–40 percent.8 In comparison in Sichuan, China,
in the eighteenth century sharecroppers paid 50 percent of farm output as
rent.9 Evidence from Babylonia in the time of Hammurabi (1792–50 BC)
suggests a share of one-third for farmland rents.10 So the share of land rents
in national income could vary between 0.2 and 0.4, taking into account that
farm output was 60–80 percent of all output. But for our purposes the exact
number hazarded makes little difference in estimating the rate of preindustrial
technological advance.

8. Clark, 2007b.

9. Zelin, 1986, 518.

10. Harris, 1968, 728.

38  chat R 7


Table 7. Population and Technological Advance, 130,000 BC to
AD 1800

Population    Technology
Population    growth rate    growth rate

Year         (millions)       (%)         (%)

130,000 BC       0.1        —         —

10,000 BC        7        0.004        0.001

AD 1         300        0.038        0.009

AD 1000        310        0.003        0.001

AD 1250        400        0.102        0.025

AD 1500        490        0.081        0.020

AD 1750        770        0.181        0.045

Source: Durand, 1977, 285.

Note: The estimate for 130,000 BC was made based on the idea that the range of
animals man could hunt expanded greatly in this era. See Stiner, 2001, 2005.

What is the history of world population up until 1800? The second col-
umn of table 7.1 shows rough estimates of world population from 130,000
BC, when anatomically modern humans first appeared, to 1750. There is huge
error in these estimates. For example, the population in 10,000 BC before the
onset of the Neolithic Revolution is estimated using the observed densities
of modern foraging populations. We know from archaeological evidence that
in the years leading up to the Neolithic Revolution humans were steadily ex-
panding the range of foods they consumed from hunting and foraging, al-
lowing for greater population densities.11 In the table I guess at a population
of 100,000 people in 130,000 BC, but the time scale is so long here that the
exact number matters little.

The last two columns of table 7.1 show the implied rate of population
growth, and the implied rate of technological advance according to the for-
mula above, with the assumption that land rents constituted a quarter of all
income before 1800.12 The low rate of technological advance before 1750 is

11. See Stiner, 2001, 2005.

12. The crudeness of these estimates is illustrated by the fact that there is tremendous un-
certainty about even the population of Italy in AD 14. Estimates of seven million and seven-
teen million both have supporters. See Brunt, 1971.

tchol o G cal a vac   39


immediately apparent. Since the Industrial Revolution rates of technological
progress for successful economies have typically been 1 percent or greater. For
the preindustrial era, at the world scale, rates of technological advance over
long periods never exceeded even 0.05 percent per year. At a rate of 0.05 per-
cent the production possibilities curve, shown in figure 7.2, shifts upward by
5 percent every hundred years. Thus the Industrial Revolution was an abrupt
shift in the character of the economy, represented in the first instance by the
rate of technological advance seemingly shifting abruptly upward.

Another suggestion that emerges from the table is that within the Mal-
thusian era the rate of technological advance increased over time. The
Malthusian era was not completely static, and indeed it showed signs of
greater dynamism as it approached its end. But even at these higher rates of
technological change, things happened very slowly. In the 1,750 years between
the   birth of Christ and the eve of the Industrial Revolution the technology
improved by a total of 24 percent, based on these population estimates. That
is,   on aggregate economies in 1750 produced only 24 percent more output per
acre of land, at a given level of people per acre, than in AD 1. That was why
the world was trapped in the Malthusian era for so long.

The Locus of Technological Advance

Just as we can use population densities to measure roughly the rate of techno-
logical advance before 1800, we can also use them to measure which societies
had the most advanced production technologies. Figures 7.5 and 7.6 give the
numbers of people per square mile of farmland in the various regions of the
world circa 1500 and 1800. Four regions show up as having high populations
per acre: central Europe, the Middle East, India, and East Asia, particularly
Korea and Japan. Though population densities had increased everywhere by
1800, as the result of technological advance, the world shows a very similar
pattern of densities. As in the modern era a large share of world population
is found in Europe, India, and East Asia.

In particular, there is little sign of any great difference in the implied
technological sophistication of Europe and either the Indian subcontinent or
East Asia on the eve of the Industrial Revolution. If living standards were the
same across these societies than there is nothing that would highlight Europe
in 1800 as having a more advanced technology than any number of eastern so-
cieties, including China, India, Korea, and Japan.

4  chat R 7


Population per thousand hectares:  <200   200-3 

400-5   600+

Figure 7.5 World population densities, circa 1500. The figure
is drawn using the admittedly wildly speculative numbers of
McEvedy and Jones, 1978, for population. Farmland areas are
those for modern times as reported by the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO).

Population per thousand hectares:  <200   200-3 

400-5   600+

Figure 7.6 World population densities, circa 1800.

The population density figures show aggregate population densities for
large areas. If we concentrate on smaller regions and subregions, such as the
Yangzi Delta in China, population densities circa 1800 were dramatic by Eu-
ropean standards. In 1801 England, then just moderately densely populated by
European standards, had 166 people per square mile. In contrast Japan as a
whole was supporting about 226 people per square mile from 1721 to 1846, and
the coastal regions of China attained even higher population densities: Jiangsu
in 1787 had an incredible 875 people per square mile. It may be objected that

tchol o G cal a vac  4


these densities were based on paddy rice cultivation, an option not open to
most of Europe. But even in the wheat regions of Shantung and Hopei Chi-
nese population densities in 1787 were more than double those of England
and France. Thus in terms of the major production activity of these societies,
agriculture, if there was any technological advantage in 1800 it likely lay with
the  coastal regions of East Asia.

However, as we saw, at least in the cases of India, China, and Japan there
are indications that material living standards were far behind those in England,
and indeed were likely lower than those of most Malthusian economies.

Technological Regression

Before 1800 there were also long periods in which technology either showed
no advance at all or even regressed. Australian Aboriginals, for example, are
believed to have arrived in that country between forty and sixty thousand
years ago, long before people first arrived in the Americas. But technology
seemingly remained frozen on the Australian continent throughout the long
period up to the arrival of British colonizers in 1788, judging by the technol-
ogy of the Aboriginals at first contact.

Furthermore, there are signs of actual technological regression. The Abo-
riginals are presumed to have reached Australia by sea. Yet by 1788 they no
longer had seaworthy craft in most of Australia. In Tasmania, where a com-
munity of about 5,000 Aboriginals was cut off from the mainland by rising
sea levels for about twelve thousand years, the technological regression was
even more dramatic. When encountered by Europeans in the late eighteenth
century, the Tasmanians had a material culture at the level of the early Paleo-
lithic, more primitive than that with which they had been endowed by their
ancestors. Despite the cold they had no clothing, not even animal skins. They
had  no bone tools, and no ability to catch the fish abounding in the sea
around them. Yet archaeological evidence shows that they had once had such
bone tools, and that fish was once an important part of their diet. The gap be-
tween their technology and that of the English in 1800 was, as illustrated
above, reflected in the respective population densities of the societies. Tasma-
nia, about half the area of England, had an estimated five thousand inhabi-
tants at a time when England had eight million.13

13. Jones, 1977, 1978.

42  chat R 7


The statues of Easter Island similarly pay mute testimony to a tech-
nological and organizational ability that the inhabitants had once had but no
longer possessed by the time of European contact. The inhabitants of Hawaii
had arrived there by sea voyages they were no longer capable of undertaking.
Allegedly they had lost the knowledge of where they had come from and so
were surprised to find that any other people existed in the world.14

In Artic Canada the Inuit, on first contact in the nineteenth century, had
a material culture considerably less complex than that of their ancestors the
Thule of five centuries before. The Thule were able to hunt large sea mam-
mals in open water, and they wintered in permanent houses that were stocked
with ingenious and elegant artifacts, including games and children’s toys, har-
poons, boats, and dogsleds. Sometime between the sixteenth and eighteenth
centuries the Inuit lost much of their material culture. Hunting of sea mam-
mals  in open water disappeared, or was restricted to smaller species. Winter
was now spent in transient snow-houses, since the Inuit were unable to pro-
cure sufficient food supplies to winter in one location. Artifacts were simpler,
and decorated or ornamental objects were produced in only a few areas. So
marked was this difference that it took archaeologists a long time to accept
that the Inuit were indeed the descendants of the Thule.15

It is even claimed that China, which led the world in technological sophis-
tication as late as 1400, also went into a technological decline. When Marco
Polo visited China in the 1290s he found that the Chinese were far ahead of
the Europeans in technical prowess. Their oceangoing junks, for example,
were larger and stronger than European ships. In them the Chinese sailed as
far as Africa. The Portuguese, after a century of struggle, reached Calicut, In-
dia, in the person of Vasco da Gama in 1498 with four ships of 70–300 tons
and perhaps 170 men. There they found they had been preceded years before
by Zheng He, whose fleet may have had as many as three hundred ships and
28,000 men.16 Yet by the time the Portuguese reached China in 1514, the
Chinese had lost the ability to build large oceangoing ships.

Similarly Marco Polo had been impressed and surprised by the deep
coal mines of China. Yet by the nineteenth century Chinese coal mines were

14. The Hawaiians thus regarded Cook on first encounter as one of their gods; Beagle-
hole, 1974, 649–60.

15. McGhee, 1994.

16. Finlay, 1992, 225–26.

tchol o G cal a vac   43


primitive shallow affairs which relied completely on manual power. By the
eleventh century AD the Chinese measured time accurately using water clocks,
yet when the Jesuits arrived in China in the 1580s they found only the most
primitive methods of time measurement in use, and amazed the Chinese by
showing them mechanical clocks. The decline in technological abilities in
China was not caused by any catastrophic social turmoil. Indeed in the period
after 1400 China continued to expand by colonizing in the south, the popu-
lation grew, and there was increased commercialization.17

Why Was Technological Advance So Slow before 1800?

This is one of the great puzzles of world history, in the light of what came after
1800. What makes it so puzzling in part is that preindustrial societies differed
from each other in every conceivable way socially and institutionally. Chris-
tian Europe had a horror of incest. In Roman Egypt the preferred marriage
partner was a sibling. Christian Europe embraced alcohol with fervor and rel-
ish, and in good times its people consumed enormous quantities. The Muslim
world abhorred it. Animal flesh was eaten with gusto in Europe. In Hindu
India all but the sinful and debased avoided it. The Europeans in turn were
horrified by the Aztec practice of eating the flesh of dead enemies.

Yet despite the bewildering variety of cultures and institutions, all these
societies had one thing in common: the production technology improved
very slowly. Indeed there were periods of regression as well as advance. But in
general the drift was inexorably upward, so that cumulatively, over millennia,
enormous advances occurred. A growing world population was a powerful and
direct testament to these changes, as much as the written and archaeological
remains of machines and devices.

But why was a society like England able to achieve modern rates of tech-
nological advance only after so many millennia? We will not address this puz-
zle  fully until we discuss the Industrial Revolution itself. There is a common
misapprehension that must be corrected first—that before 1800 the institu-
tional framework of societies removed all incentive for people to invest in
better technology.

17. Mokyr, 1990.

44  chat R 7


8  Institutions and Growth

Give a man the secure possession of a bleak rock, and he will turn it into a gar-
den  The magic of PROPERTY turns sand to gold.

—Arthur Young (1787)1

The popular misconception of the preindustrial world is of a cowering mass
of peasants ruled by a small, violent, and stupid upper class that extracted
from them all surplus beyond what was needed for subsistence and so gave no
incentives for trade, investment, or improvement in technology. These exclu-
sive  and moronic ruling classes were aided in their suppression of all enter-
prise and innovation by organized religions of stultifying orthodoxy, which
punished all deviation from established practices as heretical. The trial and
condemnation of Galileo Galilei by the Holy Inquisition in 1633, for defend-
ing   the Copernican view that the earth revolved around the sun (figure 8.1),
seems an exemplar of the reign of superstition and prejudice that was re-
sponsible for the long Malthusian night.

There may have been societies before 1800 that fit this popular stereotype.
There were frequent attempts by religious authorities to impose fallacious
dogmas about the natural world. But we shall see that, as an explanation of
the slow technological advance of the world as a whole before 1800, the pre-
vailing view makes no sense. It is maintained only by a contemporary variety
of dogmatism—that of modern economics and its priestly cast.

The central vision of modern economics, the key message of Adam Smith
in 1776 and of his followers, is that people are the same everywhere in their
material preferences and aspirations. They behave differently only because of
differences in incentives. Given the right incentives—low tax rates on earnings,

1. Young, 1792, July 30, 1787, and November 7, 1787.

45


Figure 8. The trial of Galileo before the Inquisition, 1633, as portrayed in an anony-
mous seventeenth-century painting.

security of property and of the person, free markets in goods and labor—
growth is guaranteed. The long Malthusian night persisted because of the
inability of all societies before 1800 to create such institutions.

This vision of progress permeates the potted history of the world con-
tained in the Wealth of Nations of 1776. Smith repeatedly explains the poor
economic performance of the preindustrial world as a consequence of insti-
tutions that offered poor incentives. His vision permeates contemporary eco-
nomics, from the practical councils of the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank to the theorists of university economics departments. The
so-called Washington Consensus of the 1990s on the institutional prerequisites
for growth in underdeveloped economies was an elaboration of the Smithian
program, one that could have been penned by the master himself. It called for
limited taxes and spending, low tax rates, private enterprise wherever possible,
liberalized goods and capital markets, and security of property.

In economic history as well, the Smithian vision is the dominant intellec-
tual tradition. Indeed much of modern quantitative economic history has been
a search for empirical confirmation of his vision of growth. These empirical
studies of past societies, however, rather than confirming Smith’s hypothesis,

46  chat R 8


systematically find that many early societies had all the prerequisites for eco-
nomic growth, but no technological advance and hence no growth. While all
societies before 1800 displayed slow rates of technological advance, some had
institutions as favorable to economic growth as any the current World Bank
could wish for.

Economic historians thus inhabit a strange netherworld. Their days are
devoted to proving a vision of progress that all serious empirical studies in the
field contradict. Trapped in this ever-tightening intellectual death spiral, they
can maintain the vision only though a strange intellectual dissonance, ap-
pealing to more and more elaborate conceptions of how early institutions
could unwittingly have provided poor incentives.2

We shall see below that private property institutions do play an impor-
tant role in the escape from the Malthusian Trap, but only in a much more
long-run and indirect fashion. But first we must clarify that there were pre-
industrial societies that had most, if not all, of the institutional prerequisites
for growth hundreds, and probably thousands, of years before the Industrial
Revolution.

Medieval England as an Incentivized Society

Medieval England in the years 1200–1500 experienced little or no overall
technological advance, as we saw in figure 7.2. Yet medieval England had
extraordinary institutional stability. Most individuals enjoyed great security
both of their persons and of their property. Markets for goods, labor, capital,
and even land were generally free. Indeed if we were to score medieval England
using the criteria typically applied by the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank to evaluate the strength of economic incentives, it would rank
much higher than all modern high-income economies—including modern
England.

Table 8.1 gives a rough scoring of England on these criteria in 1300 and
2000, the details of which are supplied below. For five of the twelve criteria,
the medieval economy had better institutions than the modern. For another
five they were equivalent. There were only two out of twelve criteria accord-
ing to which the medieval economy may have been worst.

2. See, for example, Greif, 2006.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   47


Table 8. The Incentives of Medieval versus Modern
England

Economic desiderata          1300     2000

Low tax rates             Yes      No

Modest social transfers         Yes     No

Stable money             Yes      No

Low public debt            Yes      No

Security of property          Yes     Yes

Security of the person         ?       Yes

Social mobility            Yes      Yes

Free goods markets          Yes     Yes

Free labor markets          Yes     Yes

Free capital markets          Yes     Yes

Free land markets           Yes      No
Rewards for knowledge creation     ?       Yes

Taxation

Preindustrial societies were generally low-tax societies. England, in particular,
was an extremely lightly taxed nation. Figure 8.2 shows all government ex-
penditures, both central and local, by year as a function of GNP from 1285 to
2000.3 Before the Glorious Revolution of 1688–89, which established the
modern constitutional democracy of Britain, government expenditures of all
types were extremely modest. In the years 1600–88 these averaged just 2.2 per-
cent of national income. Before the sixteenth century these expenditures were
typically less than 1.5 percent of national income.

Before 1689 attempts by the king to increase his take were vigorously
resisted. Thus the Poll Tax of 1380—which triggered a brief but widespread
rebellion in which the rebels captured London and killed the archbishop of
Canterbury and the king’s chancellor—was a temporary war tax on all adult

3. Expenditures, rather than taxes, are used since the government in the years 1720–1815
resorted to large-scale issue of debt to fund itself. But debt is just deferred taxes and so should
have the same disincentive effect.

48  chat R 8


100

Glorious Revolution

80

60

40

20


0

1200   1300

1400   1500

1600    1700    1800    1900    2000

Figure 8.2 Government command of output as a percentage of GNP in England, 1285–2000.

males in England, equivalent to 1 percent of a laborer’s annual earnings.4 Af-
ter this reaction no English government attempted a poll tax again, until the
similarly ill-fated venture of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in 1990.

The Glorious Revolution had an immediate negative effect in raising
government taxes and expenditures. Expenditures quickly rose to more than
10 percent of output, a level they have exceeded ever since. This spending was
almost all for warfare. The share of government expenditures in national in-
come has continued, with fluctuations, to rise to the present day. By the 1990s
government expenditures constituted 36 percent of U.K. national income.

Yet the citizens of the United Kingdom are modestly taxed relative to
those in other modern, high-income economies. A measure of the tax burden
that is more directly geared to the disincentives to work implied in the tax sys-
tem is the marginal total tax rate: the share of the last dollar in wages taken
by the government, counting all forms of taxation including employers’ con-
tributions and sales taxes. Table 8.2 shows this rate for the average wage earner
in   a selection of economies in 2000, arranged in decreasing order of the take.
This tax rate varied from 66 percent in Belgium to 32 percent in Japan.

4. The tax was 12 pence, about three times a farm laborer’s day wage.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   49


Table 8.2

Taxes and Government Spending by Country

Marginal    Social spending   Hours of market
tax rate, 2000    as percentage    employment per

Country          (%)      of GNP, 1995     adult, 2000

Belgium           66         32          954

Germany          65         29         1,010

France           56         33         1,003

Italy             53         28          1,139

Ireland           53         23         1,240

Netherlands         51         30         1,037

Sweden           49         40         1,189

Denmark          49         37         1,220

Spain            46         25          1,146

United Kingdom       41         27          1,245

United States        34         19         1,364

Japan            32         16         1,312

Sources: Social spending from Lindert, 2004, 177–78, 236–37. Marginal tax rates from Organ-
isation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Tax Database. Hours worked and
population aged 20–64 from Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Productivity Database.

Most of the money collected in taxes is used either to provide goods and
services available to all, regardless of their income, or for transfers to those
with low earnings.5 The publicly provided common goods include complete
or partial support for highways, law and order, defense, child care, education,
health care, and the component of old age pensions not indexed to earnings.
The third column of table 8.2 shows such social spending as a share of GDP
in the same economies in 1995.

A system of high taxes on economic activity, combined with generous
provision of income and services independent of effort, is precisely what the
Washington Consensus would fear as a barrier to effort and initiative. The
rational, self-interested individuals of the Smithian conception, facing such
high marginal tax rates, should have produced significant declines in work
hours. Indeed, based on the Smithian conception, it is not clear why economic

5. Some of the taxes on wages do fund pensions that are dependent in size on the earn-
ings of the recipient, but this is less common.

5  chat R 8


Figure 8.3 Inland Revenue inquiry center, Mill Hill, London.

activity has not completely ground to a halt. The taxation systems of preindus-
trial economies like medieval England—which typically returned none of the
income collected to consumers in the form of social services or transfers—
should have discouraged individual initiative to a lesser extent than modern
tax and transfer schemes.6 Modern Europe may have no equivalent of the
Inquisition, such as Galileo faced, yet it does have taxation systems that in-
trude  just as shockingly into the lives of its citizens (figure 8.3).

These data suggest two things: If incentives are the key to growth, then
some preindustrial societies like England had better incentives than modern
high-income economies. And incentives may be much less important to ex-
plaining the level of output in economies than the Smithian vision assumes.

The last column of table 8.2 shows hours worked per person aged 20–64
in the same economies. Figure 8.4 shows how this correlates with the mar-
ginal tax rate for a larger group of economies within the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), in which currently
reported marginal tax rates vary between 20 and nearly 80 percent. There is a

6. A government that taxes wages and wastes the gains simply reduces the wages of every-
one. But there is little sign within societies that work hours decline when wages are lower. A
government that taxes and then redistributes the gains to all, regardless of work input, can
eventually tax sufficiently to induce lower work hours.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   5


2,000

1,600

1,200

800

400

0

0.0        0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8        1.0

Marginal tax rate on wages

Figure 8.4 Hours worked per person aged 20–64 versus the marginal wage tax rate. Sources as
for table 8.2.

negative correlation of hours and tax rates, but the effect is surprisingly mod-
est. Average hours per adult are about 1,400 at a marginal tax rate of 20 per-
cent on wages and 1,000 at a marginal tax rate of 70 percent.7 In addition the
effect on actual hours worked may be much less than on hours reported. High
marginal tax rates have the effect of pushing workers into the undocumented
“black” economy. The correlation between documented hours and tax rates
may just reflect this substitution.8

Thus if for this same group of economies we graph marginal tax rates
against income per adult, as is done in figure 8.5, we actually find a positive
correlation. This has been dubbed by Peter Lindert the “free lunch paradox.”9
Surprisingly there is no evidence that the heavy taxes and transfers of modern
states  have any effect on output.

7. Edward Prescott, looking at changes over time in hours worked and tax rates, finds a
much more significant effect; Prescott, 2004.

8. A recent survey estimated that such economic activity now constitutes as much as 18
percent of output in high-tax European economies. For example, 24–30 percent of Italian
GDP was estimated to be produced in this way in 1990–93; Schneider and Enste, 2000, 80.

9. Lindert, 2004.

52  chat R 8


80,000

60,000

40,000

20,000

0

0.0        0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8        1.0

Marginal tax rate on wages

Figure 8.5 Income per person aged 20–64 versus the marginal wage tax rate. Income is GDP
given in 2000 dollars in the Penn World Tables.

The expenditure shares for England before 1837 in figure 8.2 report just
the activities of governments at various levels. In the preindustrial period in
Europe the church was another important extorter of income, in the form of
the tithe.

The tithe was theoretically 10 percent of gross output. If it had been col-
lected in full the church would have received as much as 15 percent of the net
agricultural income in the years before 1800, since some of the grain output
had   to be used as seed for the next year. However, the difficulties of collect-
ing the tithe in kind, particularly on animal products, led to tithe owners
collecting at a much lower rate. Tithe collections before 1800 averaged only
11 percent of land rents or 4 percent of farm output. So tithe income in pre-
industrial England was likely less than 4 percent of national income.10

Thus even allowing for the additional taxing power of the church, all
taxes collected in preindustrial England before the Glorious Revolution were
typically less than 6 percent of income.

10. Clark, 2002a.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   53


Table 8.3 Share of Preindustrial Income Collected in Taxes

All taxes (including church)

Country          Period               (%)

England         1285–1688            6

1689–1800           14

Chinaa            Ming, ca. 1550           6–8

Qing, ca. 1650          4–8

Qing, ca. 1750          8

Ottoman Empireb      1500–99             3.5

1600–99             3.5

1700–99             4.5

Sources: aFeuerwerker, 1984. bPamuk, 2005, graph 1, central government only.

England is typical of other preindustrial societies in which we can esti-
mate the share of taxes in all income. As table 8.3 shows, estimates for late Im-
perial China and for the Ottoman Empire suggest similarly low tax rates.

One reason why taxes were so light in preindustrial agrarian societies was
that the ruling class had a rich source of income without resorting to taxation:
land ownership. As figure 7.4 showed for England land rents accounted for
about 20 percent of income. In England by 1300 most of the land owned by
the ruling class was either leased out to tenants on a commercial basis or held
by tenants on fixed-rent leases with hereditary rights.

Price Stability

Money, the use of tokens that carry value, is an institution of great value to
any society. The percentage cost of holding a given stock of money per year
is the nominal interest rate, which is the real interest rate plus the inflation
rate. If you hold an average of $100 in your wallet, the real interest rate is 3
percent, and the inflation rate is 2 percent, then the annual cost of holding
money, as opposed to some real asset like land, is $5. This cost leads people
to economize on how large a cash balance they hold, and reduces the value of
money in facilitating transactions and storing value. As the inflation rate rises
the cost of holding cash becomes greater and so the real size of cash balances
declines.

54  chat R 8


100

80

60

Social loss from inflation

40

20

Inflation tax

0

Cash holdings

Figure 8.6 Demand for money and social costs of inflation.

Since token monies cost little to create, the optimal inflation rate from a
social perspective is always zero or less. That is when money has its maximum
value as a medium of exchange and a store of value. However, by printing
more money and creating inflation, governments can extract an inflation tax
from the economy. Thus from a revenue perspective the government would
favor a relatively high level of inflation, to the cost of society as a whole.11
Figure 8.6 shows the disjuncture between a revenue-maximizing government’s
incentives and the socially best outcome.

The figure shows the demand curve for cash balances as a function of the
annual cost of holding money. The inflation tax is the area of the rectangle.
When the revenue from this tax is maximized there is substantial inflation.
This would create a significant social cost, called the deadweight loss, from all
the uses of money that are now abandoned because of the cost the govern-
ment has imposed.

11. If the government maintains an inflation rate of π and r is the real interest rate, then
the issue of fiat money generates 
a revenue for the government per year of (r + π)M, where M
is the real (constant value) money stock. rM is what it would cost per year for the government
to borrow an amount M. But when π> 0, the public also has to acquire πM units of new cash
each year 
to maintain their real cash balances.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   55


8

Price
Revolution

6

4

2

0

-2

1200    1300    1400    1500    1600    1700    1800    1900    2000

Figure 8.7 Inflation rates by forty-year periods in England, 1200–2000.

Weak modern governments rely heavily on the inflation tax, and many
poor countries have been subjected to high inflation rates in recent decades.
Inflation rates have also been high in even the richest economies during some
periods over the past fifty years. However, in preindustrial England, and in-
deed in many preindustrial economies, inflation rates were low by modern
standards. Figure 8.7 shows the English inflation rate from 1200 to 2000 over
successive forty-year intervals. Before 1914 inflation rates rarely exceeded 2
percent per year, even in the period known as the Price Revolution, when the
influx of silver from the New World helped drive up prices. In a country such
as England, which had a highly regarded currency in the preindustrial era, the
crown did not avail itself of the inflation tax, despite the close restrictions
Parliament placed on its other tax revenues. Only in the twentieth century
did significant inflation appear in England. By the late twentieth century an-
nual inflation averaged 4–8 percent per year. Thus there has been a decline,
not an improvement, in the quality of monetary management in England since
the Industrial Revolution.

Even though there were periods of substantial inflation in some other
preindustrial societies, other societies achieved long-run price stability. Thus
in Roman Egypt wheat prices roughly doubled between the beginning of the

56  chat R 8


first century AD and the middle of the third.12 But that reflects an inflation
rate of less than 0.3 percent per year.

Public Debt

Another macroeconomic success forced on preindustrial economies by their
low tax bases was the general avoidance of extensive public debt. Before the
Glorious Revolution English public debt, for example, was minuscule since
the government could service with current revenues a debt of, at maximum,
less than 10 percent of GDP.

An immediate consequence of the greater taxing power of the govern-
ment after 1689, however, was an increase in public debt. Figure 8.8 shows the
ratio of public debt to GNP for England from 1688 to 2000. The fiscal stresses
of the “Second Hundred Years War” with the French saw debt rise by the
1820s to record levels of nearly 2.5 times GNP. Peace and economic growth
had reduced the debt relative to GNP by 1914. But the stresses of the wars of
the early twentieth century again inflated the debt to 2.5 times GNP by 1950.
Since then the debt has declined. But at more than 40 percent of GNP it still
substantially exceeds that of England before the Glorious Revolution.

Assuming the public has a limited perception of the level and signifi-
cance of public debt, it will crowd out private investment, reducing the cap-
ital stock, and thus reduce the overall output of societies. An unaware public
will not respond when governments finance current expenses with debt, as it
would if it were aware and rational, by increasing its savings by the amount of
the debt in anticipation of a future greater tax burden. Thus public debt will
drive up interest rates and drive out private investments. Jeffrey Williamson,
for example, argues that the huge accumulated debt of Britain during the pe-
riod of the French wars was a major economic policy disaster that substan-
tially slowed growth during the Industrial Revolution.13

The average OECD economy now has a public debt of 50–60 percent
of GNP—another sign that modern growth has been associated with poorer
macroeconomic performance.

12. Duncan-Jones, 1990, 145–55.

13. Williamson, 1984. Since the capital output ratio was typically 4 in the nineteenth
century, if the debt of the 1820s reduced private capital on a 1:1 basis, then the capital stock in
England would have been half its level in the absence of the public debt.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   57


3.0

Glorious Revolution

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

1650     1700     1750     1800     1850     1900     1950     2000

Figure 8.8 Ratio of debt to GNP in England, 1688–2000.

Security of Property

An indicator of the security of property in medieval England, and of the gen-
eral stability of institutions, is the modest fluctuation in property values over
time. Figure 8.9 shows the average real price of farmland per acre in England
by decade from 1200 to 1349 relative to the price of farm output.14 There is
remarkably little variation in the real price by decade. Medieval farmland was
an   asset with little price risk. This implies few periods of disruption and un-
certainty within the economy, for such disruption typically leaves its mark on
the prices of such assets as land and housing.

In comparison the figure also shows the decadal average of the real price
of arable land in the district of Zele, near Ghent, in Flanders from 1550 to
1699, which shows dramatically greater variation. The reason for this is easy
to infer from the narrative history of Flanders. In 1581–92 Flanders was the
setting for the battle over Dutch independence. Ghent was recaptured from
the rebels in 1584 after fierce fighting. Flanders from then was mostly Span-
ish, but the Dutch continued to raid the countryside until 1607. The fight-

14. The property sales are recorded in the cartularies of religious foundations and private
families.

58  chat R 8


1550     1570     1590     1610     1630     1650     1670     1690

200

Zele

150

100

England

50

0

1200     1220     1240     1260     1280     1300     1320     1340

Decade (England)

Figure 8.9 Real farmland prices in England, 1200–1349, and in Zele, 1550–1699. Prices for Zele
from Clark, 1996.

ing is reflected in the huge depreciation in land values in Zele: by the 1580s
they had sunk to less than 20 percent of their level in the 1550s. There was also
warfare in Flanders in 1672–97 during the wars of the Dutch and the Habs-
burgs against Louis XIV. Land values then also declined sharply relative to the
peaceful years of the 1660s.

Thus the sometimes turbulent nature of high politics in England in
the medieval period—there were armed conflicts between the king and the
barons during 1215–19, 1233, 1258–65, and much of 1312–26—had no impact
on the average person. At the local level property rights were stable and
secure.

Personal Security

A second aspect of the security and stability of medieval England was the
comparatively low threat from physical violence, discussed in chapter 6. From
the thirteenth century onward, the typical Englishman died in his bed. This
was no Hobbesian world of plundered, burning villages strewn with the un-
buried dead.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   59


In day-to-day life violence rates in the medieval period were high by com-
parison with those in modern England, but not such that they would inter-
fere with the operation of economic incentives. Even at their worst in the
thirteenth century, homicide rates, at 0.2 per thousand, still implied that the
average person over his lifetime had only about a 0.7 percent chance of being
murdered.15 By the fourteenth century these rates were down to 0.12 per
thousand. Such murder rates are at the high end for the modern world. But
most travelers would not be afraid to visit modern societies with similar or
higher homicide rates today: Trinidad and Tobago (0.12), Estonia (0.15), the
Philippines (0.14), Bahamas (0.15), Mexico (0.16), Puerto Rico (0.21), Brazil
(0.23).16 And, as figure 6.8 shows, most of the decline in homicide rates to-
ward modern levels had occurred by 1550, long before the onset of modern
economic growth.

Social Mobility

Property and person might be secure, the objection will be voiced, but in a so-
ciety in which there was a strict division between the noble class at the top
and a mass of undifferentiated servile peasantry at the bottom, this security
was that of a stultified social order, not that of an economy pregnant with the
possibilities of progress. This is yet another caricature of the preindustrial
world. Case after case, study after study, shows that even medieval England
was  a highly fluid society in which people lived at every possible economic
level, from landless wage laborers to wealthy, and in which movement between
conditions was frequent.

Taxation records and manorial court rolls reveal from the earliest years
enormous income and wealth disparities. Records of the 1297 Subsidy (a tax
on movables), for example, suggest huge variations in wealth, even above the
minimum value of possessions (about a quarter of the annual wage of a la-
borer) that made households liable to the tax.17

Even at the lowest level, the laborers and peasants, there was an active
land market from at least the early thirteenth century, which transferred even

15. Since people lived on average 35 years, and had a 0.00021 chance of being murdered
in each year, 0.7 out of every 100 were murdered over their lifetimes.

16. World Health Organization, 2002, table A.7. Rates are for the latest available year in
the 1990s.

17. Biddick, 1987.

6  chat R 8


60                                 Rest of England

London

40

20

0

0      1      2      3      4      5      6+

Surviving sons

Figure 8. Sons per male testator in England, circa 1620.

land notionally held by nonfree tenants to unrelated individuals. Thus peas-
ants or even laborers who were energetic and frugal could accumulate land and
move up the rural social hierarchy. This fact shows up, even from the earliest
years, in the great inequalities in landholdings. A survey of the royal manor
of Havering in 1251, for example, reveals that, while four tenants held more
than 200 acres of land each, forty-one held less than an acre and forty-six held
between 1 and 3 acres.18

Another factor responsible for the great social mobility and fluidity in
Malthusian societies like medieval England was the accidents of demography.
Figure 8.10 illustrates the distribution of the numbers of surviving sons for
male testators in England, both outside London and in London itself, from
the wills discussed in chapter 6. The distributions shown here would have
been characteristic for the whole Malthusian era. Outside London one-third
of males leaving wills had no surviving son, while 11 percent had four or more.
Few fathers had just one son to whom all their property and position de-
volved. Instead collateral inheritance was frequent, as were cases in which, to
retain their social position, the sons of larger families would have to accumulate

18. MacIntosh, 1980.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   6


property on their own. This meant that accidents of birth and inheritance
were constantly moving people up and down the social ladder.

The data also illustrate the well-known fact that in the preindustrial era
cities such as London were deadly places in which the population could not
reproduce itself and had to be constantly replenished by rural migrants.
Nearly 60 percent of London testators left no son. Thus the craft, merchant,
legal, and administrative classes of London were constantly restocked by so-
cially mobile recruits from the countryside.

Medieval England may have been a static society economically. But the
overall stasis should not blind us to the churning dynamism of the social fabric,
with individuals headed up and down the social scale, sometimes to an extra-
ordinary extent. A substantial fraction of the landed aristocracy of England,
even  in the medieval period, actually had its foundation not in long aristo-
cratic lineage or in military success, but in successful merchants and lawyers
who from the twelfth century onward were using their profits to buy land and
enter the aristocracy.19 High church positions were even more open to the
lower orders. In the medieval period only 27 percent of English bishops, the
clerical aristocracy, came from the nobility. The rest were the sons of lesser
gentry, farmers, or merchants and tradesmen.20

The social fluidity of medieval England was probably more the norm,
rather than an exception, for the Malthusian era. Thus in Ming and Qing
China, all the way from 1371 to 1904, commoners typically accounted for 40 per-
cent or more of those recruited by way of examination into the highest levels
of the imperial bureaucracy. And in China those with money, at least from
the 1450s onward, could alternatively buy official ranks and titles.21 In ancien
régime France the ranks of the nobility were similarly stocked from financially
successful merchants and government officers from earlier generations.22

Markets

Markets in medieval England were relatively complete and competitive. Labor,
for example, was not immobile and fixed to the land or traditional occupa-

19. Wasson, 1998.

20. Chibi, 1998, table 1.

21. Ho, 1959.

22. Kalas, 1996. However, Japan’s samurai class in the Tokugawa era (1603–1868) does
seem to have been a closed elite; Moore, 1970.

62  chat R 8


tions. Medieval Europe in general had a surprising degree of geographic mo-
bility. Given the low reproductive success of the urban population there had
to be a constant flow of labor from the country to the city. Thus the records
of a 1292 tax levied by Philip the Fair on the commoner households of Paris
show that 6 percent were foreigners: 2.1 percent English, 1.4 percent Italian,

0.8 percent German, 0.7 percent Flemish, 0.6 percent Jewish, and 0.4 percent
Scottish.23 A poll tax levied on aliens in England in 1440 revealed about
1,400–1,500 non-naturalized alien males in London at a time when the total
adult  male population of the city would be only about 15,000: nearly 10 per-
cent of the population.24

Goods markets were similarly open. The grain trade in medieval London
was so well developed that private granary space was available for hire by the
week.25 From 1211 onward local yields had no effect on the prices at which
manors sold wheat. The national price was the only thing that mattered in
predicting local prices.26

The earliest surviving records of transactions in property from the twelfth
century already show an active land and house market. Manorial court records,
which survive in quantity from the 1260s, also reveal a very active land mar-
ket among the peasantry, trading small pieces of farmland back and forth be-
tween families.27 The land market was certainly much less restricted than in
modern England, where the decisions of planning authorities can change the
value of an acre of land by millions of dollars.

Intellectual Property Rights

The one area of property rights in which medieval England may have been
lacking compared to the modern world was intellectual property rights. In most
early societies innovators had relatively poorly defined rights. Such societies
lacked the legal notion that one could own property in ideas or innovations.
Thus in both the Roman and Greek worlds, when an author published a

23. Sussman, 2005, 18, 20.

24. Thrupp, 1957, 271. This assumes a total population for London of 50,000. The tax
lists show few merchants, suggesting that the tax was targeted only to artisans and laborers.

25. Campbell et al., 1993, 101–3.

26. Clark, 2001a.

27. This is one of the reasons Alan Macfarlane, 1978, famously argued that by the Mid-
dle Ages England was no longer a peasant society.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   63


book there was no legal or practical way to stop the pirating of the text.
Copies could be freely made by anyone who acquired a version of the manu-
script, and the copier could amend and alter the text at will. It was not un-
common for a text to be reissued under the name of a new “author.”28 Such
pirating of works or ideas was frequently condemned as immoral, but writ-
ings and inventions were simply not viewed as commodities with a market
value of their own.29 There was no equivalent to the modern patent system
before its introduction in Venice some time before 1416.

But institutions, as we shall see, often respond to economic circumstances
rather than determine them. Societies with very low rates of technological in-
novation, such as those in most of the preindustrial world, would feel little
need  to establish institutions protecting the property rights of innovators.
The establishment of institutions such as patent rights in northern Europe in
the sixteenth century arose from the desire of countries to attract foreign ar-
tisans with specialized production knowledge. These workers would not em-
igrate without legal guarantees that their knowledge would be protected.

Other institutions that should have promoted innovation existed in soci-
eties like medieval England. Producers in many towns were organized into
guilds that represented the interests of the trade. These guilds could tax
members to facilitate lump-sum payments to innovators as an incentive to ex-
plain productive new techniques to the members. They also fostered compe-
titions (based more on pride and status than on monetary rewards) between
members to demonstrate new techniques.30

As long as we can find examples of Malthusian societies, like medieval
England, which were fully incentivized yet witnessed only the glacially slow
preindustrial pace of technological advance, then formal institutions cannot
be    the cause of the long Malthusian era in the simple way that most econo-
mists routinely imagine. If formal institutions are the key, it must be because
somehow Malthusian economies provided little or no specific incentive for
technological advance. But we shall see later when we come to study the In-
dustrial Revolution itself that, while innovation lay at its core, the transition
to higher rates of advance in efficiency was accomplished before there was any

28. This problem persisted into at least the seventeenth century in England, where pub-
lishers freely pirated the works of authors.

29. Long, 1991, 853–57.

30. Epstein, 1998.

64  chat R 8


significant improvement in incentives to innovate. Thus there must have been
informal, self-reinforcing social norms in all preindustrial societies that dis-
couraged innovation.

The next chapter explores why these norms might have been present in
all preindustrial societies, but were loosened over time by the formative power
of Malthusian mechanisms on the culture, and perhaps even the genetic
makeup, of long-established agrarian societies.

stt UT os a GR Ow th   65


9  The Emergence of Modern Man

We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product of a long course
of development, of a series of revolutions in the modes of production and of ex-
change.           —Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (1848)1

The Malthusian era was one of astonishing stasis, in terms of living standards
and of the rate of technological change. It was thus an economy in which we
would expect that only one economic feature, land rents, would change across
the ages. Wages, returns on capital, the capital stock per person, hours of work
per person, skill premiums—all should have remained the same on average
from the dawn of market economies to the end of the Malthusian era. This
only reinforces the puzzle of how the economy ever escaped the Malthusian
Trap. How did stasis before 1800 transform itself into dynamism thereafter?

The era’s static living standards have been amply proven by the empirical
evidence cited in previous chapters, as has the slow aggregate rate of efficiency
advance. Yet there were, despite this evidence, profound changes in basic fea-
tures of the economy within the Malthusian era. Four in particular stand out.
Interest rates fell from astonishingly high rates in the earliest societies to close
to  low modern levels by 1800. Literacy and numeracy went from a rarity to
the norm. Work hours rose from the hunter-gatherer era to modern levels by
1800. Finally there was a decline in interpersonal violence. As a whole these
changes show societies becoming increasingly middle class in their orienta-
tion. Thrift, prudence, negotiation, and hard work were becoming values for
communities that previously had been spendthrift, impulsive, violent, and
leisure loving.

1. Marx and Engels, 1967, 81.

66


A plausible source of this apparent evolution of human preferences is the
survival of the richest that is evident in preindustrial England. The arrival of
institutionally stable agrarian economies with the Neolithic agricultural rev-
olution   of 6000–7000 BC gradually molded human behavior, probably cul-
turally but also potentially genetically.2 Evidence from animal populations
shows that, in cases in which a trait has previously been neutral in terms of
survival, so that it exists in varying frequencies in populations, strong selec-
tive pressures can change the characteristics of the population within a few
generations.3

The people of the settled agrarian economies who launched the Industrial
Revolution around 1800, though they lived no better than their grandfathers
of   the Paleolithic, were systematically different in attitudes and abilities. The
exact date and trigger of the Industrial Revolution may remain a mystery, but
its probability was increasing over time in the environment of institutionally
stable Malthusian economies. Technology, institutions, and people were
interacting in an elaborate dance in the long eight- to ten-thousand-year pre-
industrial agrarian era.

Interest Rates

One of the most profound prices in any economy, along with land rents and
wage rates, is the interest rate for the use of capital. Capital, the stored-up
output that is used to aid current production, exists in all economies. Its prin-
cipal form in the settled agrarian economies that preceded the Industrial Rev-
olution was housing and land improvements. But another important element
in temperate regions was the stored-up fertility of the land, which constituted
a bank that farmers could make deposits into and withdrawals from depending
on the urgency of their needs. There was thus as much capital per unit of out-
put in medieval Europe, India, or China as there is in modern economies.

Because capital allows for the production of more output when combined
with labor and land, it commands a rent just like land, and that rent, when

2. Galor and Moav, 2002, construct a theoretical model of such a process.

3. I owe this point to Oded Galor. Recent experiments in domesticating foxes and rats,
for example, suggest that, with sufficiently strong selection, powerful changes can be made in
the behavior of animals within as few as eight generations; Trut, 1999.

th  R G c o o R  a  67


we measure it as percentage return on the value of the capital, we call the
interest rate or the return on capital. The real interest rate is simply the num-
ber  of dollars of rent the lender of a $100 worth of capital will receive each
year, net of allowances for the depreciation of the value of the capital from
physical decay or from loss of value through inflation in the case of financial
capital. Such implicit interest rates can be measured in any society in which
land or housing is both sold and rented.

Measuring real interest rates is not easy in the modern world of relatively
high and variable inflation rates and rapidly changing asset prices. But rapid
inflation, as we saw for the case of England, is a modern problem generally
absent from the Malthusian era. So typically in England the nominal return
on assets, the annual payment to the owner divided by the price, provided
a good measure of the real return on capital before 1800. For England we have
two measures of the rate of return that stretch back with relatively few inter-
ruptions from the modern era to 1200. The first is the return on ownership
of farmland, the major asset before 1800. The second is the return on rent
charges. Rent charges were perpetual fixed nominal obligations secured by
land or houses. The ratio of the sum paid per year to the price of such a rent
charge gives the interest rate for another very-low-risk asset, since the charge
was typically much less than the rental value of the land or house.

Both of these returns have an additional attraction as a measure of return
on capital for the preindustrial era in Europe: they were each excused from
any taint of usury under Catholic doctrine. Since land and houses were pro-
ductive assets it was not considered usurious to collect a return on the owner-
ship of them, and there were no limitations on the amount of this return.
Such an exemption was fortunate, since all across medieval Europe the church
was the greatest owner of land and rent charges.

Figure 9.1 shows the percentage return on farmland and rent charges by
decade in England from 1170 to 2003. Medieval England had real rates of
return typically 10 percent or greater. By the eve of the Industrial Revolution
rates of return had fallen to 4–5 percent.

The rates of return for medieval England were in fact typical of Europe
in this period. Table 9.1 shows the returns on land purchases and rent charges
for other areas in Europe between 1200 and 1349. There is surprisingly little
variation across the different countries. The decline in interest rates in
England was also echoed across the rest of Europe. Rates of return by 1600

68  chat R 9


15

12

9

6

Rent charges

3

Farmland

0

1150    1250    1350    1450    1550    1650    1750    1850    1950

Figure 9. Return on land and on rent charges by decade in England, 1170–2003. For the years
before 1350 the land returns are the moving average of three decades because in these early years
this measure is noisy.

had fallen from these medieval levels in Genoa, the Netherlands, Germany,
and Flanders.4

All societies before 1400 for which we have sufficient evidence to calculate
interest rates show high rates by modern standards.5 In ancient Greece loans
secured by real estate generated returns of close to 10 percent on average all the
way from the fifth century to the second century BC. The temple of Delos,
which received a steady inflow of funds in offerings, invested them at a stan-
dard 10 percent mortgage rate throughout this period.6 Land in Roman Egypt
in the first three centuries AD produced a typical return of 9–10 percent.
Loans secured by land typically earned an even higher return of 12 percent.7

4. De Wever, 1978; Clark, 1988; Cipolla, 1993, 216–17; de Vries and van der Woude, 1997,

113–29.

5. Hudson, 2000.

6. Compound interest was not charged, so since some of the loans ran for a number of
years the actual rate charged was somewhat lower than 10 percent. See Larsen, 1938, 368–79.

7. Calculated from the ratio of rents to land sale prices given in Johnson, 1936, 83–173,
using wheat prices from Duncan-Jones, 1990, 146.

th  R G c o o R  a  69


Table 9. Rate of Return on Capital across
Europe, 1200–1349

Country     Land    Rent charges

Englanda      10.0       9.5

Flandersa       —       10.0

Francea       11.0       —

Germanya      10.2      10.7

Italyb        10.1       10.7

Sources: aClark, 1988, table 3. bHerlihy, 1967, 123,

134, 138, 153 (Pistoia).

Medieval India had similarly high interest rates. Hindu law books of the
first to ninth centuries AD allow interest of 15 percent of the face amount of
loans secured by pledges of property, and 24–30 percent of loans with only
personal security. Inscriptions recording perpetual temple endowments from
the tenth century AD in southern India show a typical income yield of 15 per-
cent of the investment.8 The return on these temple investments in southern
India was still at least 10 percent in 1535–47, much higher than European in-
terest rates by this time. At Tirupati Temple at the time of the Vijayanagar
Empire the temple invested in irrigation improvements at a 10 percent return
to  the object of the donor. But since the temple only collected 63 percent on
average of the rent of the irrigated land, the social return from these invest-
ments was as high as 16 percent.9

While the rates quoted above are high, those quoted for earlier agrarian
economies are even higher. In Sumer, the precursor to ancient Babylonia,
between 3000 and 1900 BC rates of interest on loans of silver (as opposed to
grain) were 20–25 percent. In Babylonia between 1900 and 732 BC the nor-
mal rates of return on loans of silver were 10–25 percent.10 In the sixth cen-
tury BC the average rate on a sample of loans in Babylonia was 16–20 percent,
even though these loans were typically secured by houses and other property.
In the Ottoman Empire in the sixteenth century debt cases brought to court
revealed interest rates of 10–20 percent.11

8. Sharma, 1965, 59–61.

9. Stein, 1960, 167–69.

10. Homer and Sylla, 1996, 30–31.

11. Pamuk, 2006, 7.

7  chat R 9


When we consider forager societies the evidence on rates of return be-
comes much more indirect. There is no explicit capital market, and lending
may be subject to substantial default risks given the lack of fixed assets with
which to secure loans. However, one important element underlying the exis-
tence of interest rates in any society is a behavior called time preference. Time
preference is simply the idea that, everything else being equal, people prefer to
consume now rather than later. The time preference rate measures the strength
of  this preference. It is the percentage by which the amount of consumption
of a good next year must be higher than consumption this year for people to
be indifferent between consuming now or later.

Time preference rates are very high in young children and decline as they
age. Experiments suggest that American 6-year-olds have time preference rates
on the order of 3 percent per day. That is, they will delay collecting a reward
only if they are offered the equivalent of an interest rate of at least 3 percent
per day, or a monthly interest rate of 150 percent.12 Time preference rates also
vary across people within a society. They are higher among the poor and less
educated. Children with high time preference rates in preschool in California
did  less well academically later and had lower SAT scores.13

Anthropologists have devised ways to measure time preference rates in
premarket societies. They look, for example, at the relative rewards of ac-
tivities whose benefits occur at different times in the future: digging up wild
tubers or fishing with an immediate reward, as opposed to trapping with a
reward delayed by days, as opposed to clearing and planting with a reward
months in the future, as opposed to animal rearing with a reward years in the
future.

A recent study of Mikea forager-farmers in Madagascar found, for ex-
ample, that the typical Mikea household planted less than half as much land
as was needed to feed themselves. Yet the returns from shifting cultivation of
maize were enormous. A typical yield was a minimum of 74,000 kilocalories
per hour of work. Foraging for tubers, in comparison, yielded an average re-
turn of 1,800 kilocalories per hour. Despite this the Mikea rely on foraging for
a large share of their food, consequently spending most of their time foraging.
This implies extraordinarily high time preference rates.14 James Woodburn

12. Krause and Harbaugh, 1999, 13.

13. Mischel et al., 1989.

14. Tucker, 2001, 299–338. Maize and manioc cultivation had higher yield variances, and
so were riskier than foraging.

th  R G c o o R  a   7


claimed that the Hadza of Tanzania showed a similar disinterest in distant
benefits: “In harvesting berries, entire branches are often cut from the trees to
ease the present problems of picking without regard to future loss of yield.”15
Even the near future mattered little. The Pirahã of Brazil are even more blind
to future benefits. Daniel Everett, a linguistic anthropologist who has studied
their language and culture for many years, concluded that future events and
benefits were of almost no interest to them.16

Why Did Interest Rates Decline?

The real rate of return, r, can be thought of as composed of three elements:
the time preference rate, ρ, a default risk premium, d, and a premium that re-
flects the growth of overall expected incomes year to year, ψgy. Thus

r ≈ ρ + d + ψgy.

The existence of time preference in consumption cannot be derived from
consideration of rational action. Indeed it has been considered by some econ-
omists to represent a systematic deviation of human psychology from rational
action, in which there should be no absolute time preference. Economists have
thought of time preference rates as being hard-wired into people’s psyches and
as having stemmed from some very early evolutionary process.17

The “growth premium” in interest rates reflects the fact that if all in-
comes are growing it is harder to persuade people to lend money and defer
consumption. Suppose everyone knows that in twenty years their income will
have doubled, which has been the case in a number of modern economies.
They will all prefer to borrow from the future to enjoy better consumption
now, rather than save money when they are poor to spend when they are
rich. Only if interest rates rise to high levels can sufficient numbers of people
be persuaded to save rather than consume now. Since sustained income
growth appeared in the economy only after 1800, the income effect implies
an increase in interest rates as we move from the Malthusian to the modern

15. Woodburn, 1980, 101.

16. Everett, 2005.

17. Rogers, 1994, gives an evolutionary argument for why positive time preference would
exist, deducing, however, that the time preference rate would always be the 2.5 percent or so
observed in high-income modern societies.

72  chat R 9


economy—an increase which of course we do not observe. We should be the
high-interest-rate society, not England in the Malthusian era.

Default risks also cannot explain high early interest rates. The default
risk premium, d, reflects the fact that all investment involves some risk that
the capital invested will not result in future consumption but will be lost. The
loss could come from the death of the investor, although if the investor has
altruism toward his or her children this will reduce the compensation needed
for  this risk. However, the risk of the death of the investor, we know from the
evidence presented above on mortality in the Malthusian era, was unchanged
over time and thus cannot explain any of the decline in interest rates before
1800.

The extra 6–8 percent return that capital offered in medieval England, if
it came from default risks, had to stem from the risk of expropriation of the
asset. But in the previous chapter I emphasized that in fact medieval England
was a very stable society, and that investments in land in practice carried a
very low risk. Confiscation or expropriation was extremely rare, and real land
prices were stable over the long run.

The medieval land market offered a practically guaranteed 10 percent or
more real rate of return with almost no risk. It was a society in which anyone
could significantly change his social position just by saving and investing a
modest share of his income. Suppose, for example, that a landless farm
worker in thirteenth-century England, at the bottom of the social ladder,
were to start at age 15, invest 10 percent of his annual wage earnings in land,
and reinvest any rents received. By age 50 he would have accumulated 85 acres
to pass on to his children or support them in comfort in their old age, mak-
ing him among the largest peasant proprietors in most medieval villages.

One other source of risk in purchasing land does exist in any society: the
risk that another claimant with a prior title will appear. Was it that the me-
dieval legal system was so imperfect as to make all property purchases highly
insecure?

A problem with any such interpretation is that different parts of England
in the Middle Ages had very different jurisdictions and legal structures. Some-
time before 1200, for example, London had secured from the crown a large set
of privileges. The first of these was that the city was allowed to pay a lump
sum for taxes to the king, “the farm of the city,” and to arrange its own collec-
tion within the city of this annual sum. The town was also allowed to appoint
its own judges, even in cases before the crown courts, so that Londoners would

th  R G c o o R  a   73


only ever be judged by Londoners. Land cases were to be settled according
to the law of the city, even in the king’s courts. Londoners were free from trial
by battle, the Norman tradition that resulted in some property cases being
determined by armed combat as late as the 1270s.

In the reigns of Richard I and John (1189–1216) the kings’ fiscal problems
led them to sell off to many other towns rights and privileges similar to those
of London. Thus by 1200 or soon thereafter there were a host of local legal ju-
risdictions in urban areas in England under which property could be held. If
the  high returns on land and rent charges were the result of deficiencies in
property laws and their enforcement, then we would expect some of these ju-
risdictions to have performed much better than others. In those with the best-
defined property rights returns would be lowest. In the sample of rent charge
returns I have for the years before 1349 I have enough data on a small group
of cities and towns to compare their average rate of return with the national
average. The results are shown in table 9.2. There is little difference between
rates of return in the six specific locations and the national average. If inse-
curity in property rights explains high medieval rates of return, different juris-
dictions, amazingly, created systems with roughly the same degree of insecurity.
The third problem with an interpretation relying on insecure property
rights  is that even if property rights were generally insecure in early societies,
there would have been periods of greater and lesser security. Thus if the risk
of confiscation was the source of high early interest rates we would expect that
interest rates would fluctuate from period to period, and would be connected
to political developments. Yet not only were average rates of interest very high,
they tended to be high and relatively stable over time where they can be mea-
sured reasonably well, as with rent charges. Thus in figure 9.1 note that the
rate of return on rent charges in the decades from the 1180s to the 1290s all fall
within about 1 percent of the average rate of 10.4 percent. If these returns are
so high because of the radical insecurity of property, why did they not show any
substantial deviations between decades, despite the huge changes in political

regimes in this era?

In the thirteenth century, for example, the reigns of John (1199–1216) and
Henry III (1216–72) were times of greater turmoil in England. There was
open rebellion by the barons in the last years of John’s reign and again in the
1260s under Henry III. Edward I (1272–1307) ushered in nearly forty years
of stability and strong central government. But his son Edward II (1307–27)
was again a weak ruler who was eventually deposed and murdered by his wife

74  chat R 9


Table 9.2

Rent Charge Returns by Location, 1170–1349

Number of    Mean return    Median return

Location          observations      (%)         (%)

National average        535        11.0        10.1

Canterbury           30        11.8        12.2

Coventry            48        11.4        10.0

London             84        10.3        10.0

Oxford             68        10.2        10.0

Stratford-upon-Avon       8        11.7        12.3

Sudbury             8        11.1         12.3

Note: In calculating the mean returns twenty-one observations implying rates of return below
4 percent or above 25 percent were dropped. The mean for the entire sample without drop-
ping these observations would be 11.5 percent.

and her lover and replaced as ruler by his son. But there is no correspondence
between the periods of calm and stability, as under Edward I, and the pre-
vailing interest rate. It is always high before 1300, whatever the politics, but
shows signs of declining in the turbulent years 1307–27 (see figure 9.1).

The implied return on investments in land in Zele in Flanders, an area
that suffered greatly from war and civil strife in the years 1580–1720, is shown
in figure 9.2. These returns again show the influence of the war years, with
much higher returns on land purchases in the years 1581–92. But notably, de-
spite the problems of war, the average return on land is only about 4 percent.
The Netherlands and Belgium were the first areas in Europe to come close to
modern rates of return in the preindustrial era. And even in the worst years
of  the Spanish reconquest in 1581–92, when many Protestants were fleeing
from areas like Zele to the Dutch Republic, the average return on capital in-
vested in land was still below the steady rate of 10 percent found even in the
most secure circumstances in medieval Europe.

Literacy and Numeracy

At the same time as we see interest rates decline, there were significant increases
in the basic literacy and numeracy of societies as we approach the Industrial

th  R G c o o R  a   75


12


War

War

War

9

6

3

0

1550          1600          1650          1700          1750

Figure 9.2 Returns on landholding in Zele, 1550–1750. Data from De Wever, 1978.

Revolution. The average numeracy and literacy of even rich people in the
classical and medieval eras in Europe was surprisingly poor. Table 9.3, for
example, shows five age declarations of a prosperous landowner, Aurelius
Isidorus, in Roman Egypt in the third century AD. No two of the declara-
tions are consistent. Clearly Isidorus had no clear idea of his own age. Within
two years’ time he gives ages that differ by eight years. Other sources show
that Isidorus was illiterate.

Isidorus’s age declarations show a common pattern for those who are
innumerate and illiterate. That is a tendency to round the age to one ending
in a 0 or a 5. In populations in which ages are recorded accurately, 20 percent
of the recorded ages will end in 5 or 0. We can thus construct a score variable
H—which measures the degree of “age heaping,” where

H = 5 X – 20)

—4 (

and X is the percentage of age declarations ending in 5 or 0—to measure the
percentage of the population whose real age is unknown. This measure of
the percentage of people who did not know their true age correlates moder-
ately well with literacy rates in modern societies.

76  chat R 9


Table 9.3 Age Reporting by Aurelius Isidorus

Date        Declared age    Implied birth year
April 297        35          262

April 308         37          271

August 308        40           268

Pre-June 309       45           264

June 309         40          269

Source: Duncan-Jones, 1990, 80.

A lack of knowledge of their true age was widespread among the Roman
upper classes as evidenced by age declarations made by their survivors on
tombstones, which show a high degree of age heaping (table 9.4). Typically
half   had ages unknown to their survivors. Age awareness did correlate with
social class. More than 80 percent of officeholders’ ages were known to rela-
tives. When we compare this with death records for modern Europe we find
that by the eve of the Industrial Revolution age awareness in the general pop-
ulation had increased markedly. In the eighteenth century in Paris only 15
percent of the general population had unknown ages at the time of death, in
Geneva 23 percent, and in Liege 26 percent.18

We can also look at the development of age awareness by examining
censuses of the living. Some of the earliest of these are for medieval Italy, in-
cluding the famous Florentine catasto of 1427, a wide-ranging survey of wealth
for  tax purposes. Even though Florence was then one of the richest cities of the
world and the center of the Renaissance, 32 percent of the city’s population
did not know their ages. In comparison a census in 1790 of the small English
town of Corfe Castle, with a mere 1,239 inhabitants, most of them laborers,
shows that all but 8 percent knew their age. The poor in England around 1800
had more age awareness than office holders in the Roman Empire, as table 9.4
demonstrates.19

18. Duncan-Jones, 1990, 90.

19. The exception to this trend is ages recorded in the censuses of Roman Egypt, taken
every seven years. Here age heaping is modest, and the age structure is much more plausible
than the tombstone ages (or mummy inscription ages in Egypt). But this accuracy may be ex-
plained by the census procedures. If children first enter the census at an accurate age, and then

th  R G c o o R  a  77


Table 9.4 Age Heaping over Time

Location             Date      Type     Group     Z

Rome*a                Empire     Urban    Rich      48

Roman Africa*a            Empire     Both     Rich      52

Carthage*a               Empire     Urban    Rich      38

Englandb               ca. 1350    Both     Rich      61

Florence, Italya            1427      Urban    All       32

Pistoia, Italya             1427      Urban    All       42

Florentine territorya         1427      Rural    All       53

Corfe Castle, Englandc,d       1790     Urban    All       8

1795     Urban    Poor      14

Ardleigh, Englande          1796      Rural    All       30

Terling, Englandf           1801      Rural    Poor      19

Cotton operatives, Englandg     1833     Both     Workers     6

Sources: aDuncan-Jones, 1990, 84–90. bRussell, 1948, 103–11. cHutchins et al., 1796, xc–xciii.
dDorset Record Office, P11/OV197. eEssex Record Office, D/P 263/1/5. fEssex Record Office,
D/P 299/12/3. gParliamentary Papers, 1834, 21–31.

Note: * denotes ages of the dead. Since age heaping is more evident with the elderly, the table
was constructed for ages 23–62.

Another feature of the Roman tombstone age declarations is that many
ages were greatly overstated. We know that life expectancy in ancient Rome
was perhaps as low as 20–25 at birth. Yet the tombstones record people as dy-
ing at ages as high as 120. In North Africa, 3 percent allegedly died at 100 or
more.20 Almost all these great ages must be complete fantasy. In comparison,
a  set of 250 relatively prosperous testators in England circa 1600, whose ages
can be established from parish records, had a highest age at death of 88. Yet
the children and grandchildren who memorialized richer Romans did not
detect any implausibility in recording these fabulous ages.

For literacy the earliest measure we have is the ability of people to sign
their name on various legal documents, shown in figure 9.3. For England these

have their ages updated from the previous census by the census takers every seven years, accu-
racy will be preserved, even if the individuals themselves have little idea of their own ages;
Bagnall and Frier, 1994.

20. Hopkins, 1966, 249.

78  chat R 9


100


80                Men, north

Men, England

60

Men, Norwich

Diocese

Women, England

40

20                 Women, north

0

1580    1620    1660    1700    1740    1780    1820    1860    1900

Figure 9.3 Literacy in England, 1580–1920. Data for 1750s–1920s from Schofield, 1973, men
and women who sign marriage resisters; for the north, 1630s–1740s, from Houston, 1982, wit-
nesses who sign court depositions; for Norwich Diocese, 1580s–1690s, from Cressy, 1980, witnesses
who sign ecclesiastical court declarations.

proxy measures for literacy go back to the 1580s: such things as the percent-
age of grooms who signed the marriage register or the percentage of witnesses
in court cases who signed their depositions. These measures similarly show a
long upward movement in implied literacy rates as England approached the
Industrial Revolution.

It is hard to define measures of actual literacy before 1580, but we know
that literacy rates must have been extremely low in medieval Europe. In
England, for example, after the Norman Conquest of 1066 clergy had the
privilege of being tried only in ecclesiastical courts, the so-called benefit of
clergy. The test for whether an accused in secular courts could assert benefit
of clergy became the ability to read a passage from the Bible. By 1351 this was
established as the test in law. In the medieval period the number of people
outside those with clerical training who could read was so low that this abil-
ity was regarded as a sufficient test.

The low levels of literacy and numeracy in early societies go along with
what has been called the “chronic vagueness” of early mentalities. Fabulous
numbers are quoted in accounts and chronicles, when even the most cursory

th  R G c o o R  a  79


2.5

Matched pairs

2.0

1.5

All data

1.0

0.5

0.0

1200    1300    1400    1500    1600    1700    1800    1900    2000

Figure 9.4 Wage of craftsmen relative to that of laborers in England, 1200–2000. The relative
wage looks different in the earlier years depending on whether it is calculated using all the wage
data or only data for matched pairs of craftsmen and their helpers.

inquiry would have shown how fallacious they were. Gervaise of Canterbury,
for example, writing a contemporaneous account of the campaign of Henry II
of England against the Count of Toulouse in 1159, notes that the king funded
the war with a special tax of £180,000. English Treasury records suggest the
actual sum was about £8,000. Roger of Wendover, a leading scholar of the
age, notes that in 1210 there were three thousand masters and scholars in Ox-
ford. The actual figure would not have been above three hundred, based on
later histories of the university. Tacitus, the great Roman historian, describes
an incident at a private gladiatorial contest in the small town of Fidenae, near
Rome, during which a wooden stand collapsed, killing fifty thousand people.
More recent experience with such collapses at large sporting events suggests a
likelier figure would be fewer than a hundred deaths.21

The rising standards of numeracy and literacy do not seem to have been
driven by any market signals from within the Malthusian economic system.
There is no sign, for example, that the rewards to numeracy and literacy were
any higher in England in 1800 than they were in 1200. We cannot measure

21. Ramsay, 1903.

8  chat R 9


this directly, but certainly the premium for other skills in the labor market
seems to have actually declined over the long run. Thus if we measure the wage
of building craftsmen against that of the laborers who assisted them during
the interval 1200–2000, as in figure 9.4, we find that the skill premium was
at its highest in the earliest years, before the onset of the Black Death in 1349.
Then a craftsman earned nearly double the wage of a laborer. If there was ever
an incentive to accumulate skills it was in the early economy. Thereafter the
skill premium declined to a lower but relatively stable level from about 1370
until 1900, a period of over five hundred years, before declining further in the
twentieth century. Thus the greatest reward for skills and training was be-
stowed in the marketplace long before the Industrial Revolution.

Nor, in places like England, was higher numeracy or literacy before 1800
the result of any kind of government regulation or intervention. The educa-
tion that people were acquiring was largely privately funded (though aided by
growing numbers of charitable foundations).

Work Hours

We saw in chapter 3 that work hours were very high in England by 1800 com-
pared to forager and shifting cultivation societies. When exactly the transition
to longer work hours took place is hard to establish, given the nature of pre-
industrial records. It is clear that the transition in England had largely occurred
before the onset of the Industrial Revolution. But work hours in medieval
England were probably already high by forager standards.22

Thus despite the static living conditions of the preindustrial world we
have seen that somehow a very different society had emerged by 1800, at least
in some parts of Europe. Returns on capital had fallen close to modern levels,
work effort was much higher than in forager societies, skill premiums de-
creased, interpersonal violence rates declined, literacy and numeracy rose.
Places like England were becoming more stereotypically middle class at all
levels of society.23

22. Clark and van der Werf, 1998; Clark, 2005.

23. Mokyr argues in an analogous way that the stock of useful knowledge, meaning the
knowledge economic agents had about their physical environment, in Europe had been expanded
greatly by 1800. The practice of performing experiments to establish relationships between
causes and effects, for example, had by then spread widely. He ascribes this to the intellectual
developments of the Age of Reason and the Enlightenment; Mokyr, 2002, 28–77; 2005, 286.

th  R G c o o R  a   8


Judicial Violence

We have already noted the declining homicide rates in preindustrial England,
the only preindustrial society for which we can derive such measures, in the
years 1190–1800. Along with these declines in interpersonal violence went a
general decline in the taste of the public for blood, torture, and mayhem. Ear-
lier societies—the Babylonians, Greeks, Romans, Incas—seem remarkably
similar to ours in many of the details of their daily life, except for one thing:
the apparently insatiable blood lust of the ancients. The Romans seem the most
depraved. Criminals were executed for sport in the Coliseum and smaller
town amphitheaters, often after being burned, raped, gouged, mangled, or
mutilated. Captives from Roman wars were made to fight to the death for the
amusement of easily bored crowds. Wild animals were set on each other, or
on humans, just to warm the crowd up.

Even in the medieval period England was never the scene of such vi-
ciousness. But cock fighting, bear and bull baiting, public executions, and the
public display of the decaying bodies of the executed were all still popular en-
tertainments into the eighteenth century. Pepys, a man of refined musical
and literary tastes, records the events of October 13, 1660, wryly and dis-
passionately in his diary: “Out to Charing Cross, to see Major-general Har-
rison hanged, drawn, and quartered; which was done there, he looking as
cheerful as any man could do in that condition. He was presently cut down,
and his head and heart shown to the people, at which there was great shouts
of joy   From thence to my Lord’s, and took Captain Cuttance and Mr.

Sheply to the Sun Tavern, and did give them some oysters.”24 What he is de-
scribing so blithely is seeing someone partially strangled, then disemboweled
and castrated, then watching his organs being burned in front of him, before
finally being beheaded. Gradually this delight in pain faded. The last such ex-
ecution for treason in England was in 1782. Women who murdered their hus-
bands or counterfeited the coinage were no longer burned at the stake after
1789.25 Riotous behavior by visitors viewing the lunatics in Bedlam, a popu-
lar entertainment in eighteenth-century London, forced its governors in 1764
to hire four constables and four assistants to patrol the galleries on holidays.26

24. Pepys, 2000, October 13, 1660.

25. By the eighteenth century such women were normally first strangled by the execu-
tioner before being burned.

26. Hunter and Macalpine, 1963, 427–29.

82  chat R 9


In 1770 visits were finally restricted to those with admission tickets issued by
one of the governors. The gibbeting of the bodies of executed criminals ended
by 1832. Cock fighting and bear and bull baiting were all outlawed in 1835.
Finally public executions were ended in 1869.

Selection Pressures

Why was Malthusian society, at least in Europe, changing in this way as we
approached the Industrial Revolution? Social historians may invoke the Protes-
tant Reformation of the sixteenth century, intellectual historians the Scientific
Revolution of the seventeenth century or the Enlightenment of the eighteenth.
Thus “The Enlightenment in the West is the only intellectual movement in
human history that owed its irreversibility to the ability to transform itself
into economic growth.”27

But a problem with these invocations of movers from outside the economic
realm is that they merely push the problem back one step. Like invoking God
to explain the creation of the world, it necessarily invites the question of the
creation of God.

Protestantism may explain rising levels of literacy in northern Europe
after 1500. But why after more than a thousand years of entrenched Catholic
dogma was an obscure German preacher able to effect such a profound
change in the way ordinary people conceived religious belief? The Scientific
Revolution may explain the subsequent Industrial Revolution. But why after
at   least five millennia of opportunity did systematic empirical investigation
of the natural world finally emerge only in the seventeenth century?28 And,
had the unexpected and inexplicable Scientific Revolution never occurred,
would the world have forever remained in the grip of the Malthusian Trap?
Ideologies may transform the economic attitudes of societies. But ideologies
are themselves also the expression of fundamental attitudes in part derived
from the economic sphere.

There is, however, no need to invoke such a deus ex machina in the Mal-
thusian era, given the strong selective processes identified in chapter 6. The
forces leading to a more patient, less violent, harder-working, more literate,

27. Mokyr, 2005, 336.

28. Mokyr, in a personal communication, argues that the Scientific Revolution and sub-
sequent Enlightenment were themselves by-products of the development of commercial capi-
talism in early modern Europe. But that, of course, merely creates another regress.

th  R G c o o R  a   83


100

80

60

40

20

0

0-9    10-24    25-49    50-99   100-249   250-499   500-999   1,000+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 9.5 Literacy and assets of male testators in England, 1630.

and more thoughtful society were inherent in the very Malthusian assump-
tions that undergird preindustrial society. Figure 9.5, for example, shows
literacy rates for men circa 1630 as a function of wealth. As was shown in
chapter 6, the wealthiest testators, who were almost all literate, left twice as
many children as the poorest, of whom only about 30 percent were literate.
Generation by generation the sons of the literate were relatively more numer-
ous  than the sons of the illiterate.

Agrarian societies differed in two crucial ways from their forager prede-
cessors. Agriculture allowed for much higher population densities, so that,
instead of living in communities of twenty to fifty, people now lived in com-
munities of hundreds to thousands. By 2500 BC the cities of Sumeria are
estimated to already have been as large as forty thousand people.29 Agrarian
societies also had large stocks of assets that were owned by specific people:
land, houses, and animals. The sizes of these societies allowed the extensive
use of money as a medium of exchange. Their size, and the importance of the
income streams from these assets, created a need for enduring records of
property ownership and property transfers. Thus a mass of clay tablets record-

29. Gat, 2002.

84  chat R 9


Figure 9.6 Cuneiform tablet account of cattle
in Mesopotamia in the Ur III period (2112–
04 BC).

ing leases, sales, wills, and labor contracts survive from ancient Sumeria and
Babylonia. Figure 9.6 shows the most common type of cuneiform tablet, a
receipt for delivery of goods.

In the institutional and technological context of these societies, a new set
of human attributes mattered to accumulate the only currency significant in
the Malthusian era—reproductive success. Literacy and numeracy, previously
irrelevant, were now both helpful for achieving economic success in agrarian
preindustrial economies. And because reproductive success was linked to eco-
nomic success, facility with numbers and words was pulled along in its wake.
Patience and hard work had found a new reward in a society with large
amounts of capital; thus these characteristics were now also favored.

Trade and production in turn also helped stimulate innovations in arith-
metic and writing systems designed to make calculations and recording easier.
The replacement of Roman numerals by Arabic numerals in Europe, for ex-
ample, was aided by the demands of trade and commerce. In medieval Europe
“the needs of commerce formed one important stimulus to the spread and
growth of arithmetic.” In Europe religious bodies and the state, insulated from

th  R G c o o R  a   85


market pressures, were the slowest to adopt these innovations. The English
Treasury was still employing Roman numerals in its accounts in the sixteenth
century. But from the thirteenth century onward Arabic numerals increas-
ingly dominated commerce, and many treatises on arithmetic were clearly
aimed at a commercial audience.30

So the market nature of settled agrarian societies stimulated intellectual
life in two ways. It created a demand for better symbolic systems to handle
commerce and production. And it created a supply of people who were adept
at  using these systems for economic ends. While living standards were not
changing, the culture, and perhaps even the genes, of the people subject to
these conditions were changing under the selective pressures they exerted. All
Malthusian societies, as Darwin recognized, are inherently shaped by survival
of   the fittest. They reward certain behaviors with reproductive success, and
these behaviors become the norm of the society.

What were societies like at the dawn of the settled agrarian era with the
Neolithic Revolution of circa 8000 BC? Based on observation of modern
forager and shifting cultivation societies we would expect that the early agri-
culturalists were impulsive, violent, innumerate, illiterate, and lazy. Eth-
nographies of such groups emphasize high rates of time preference, high levels
of interpersonal violence, and low work inputs. Abstract reasoning abilities
were limited.

The Pirahã, a forager group in the Brazilian Amazon, are an extreme ex-
ample. They have only the number words hói (roughly one), hoí (roughly two),
and aibaagi (many). On tests they could not reliably match number groups
beyond 3. Once the number of objects reached as large as 9, they could almost
never match them.31 Yet the Pirahã perform very well as hunters and in tests
of spatial and other abilities. Similarly the number vocabulary of many sur-
viving forager societies encompasses only the numbers 1, 2, and “many.” For-
ager society must thus have had no selective pressures toward the kinds of
attitudes and abilities that make an Industrial Revolution.

The New World after the Neolithic Revolution offered economic success
to a different kind of agent than had been typical in hunter-gatherer society:
Those with patience, who could wait to enjoy greater consumption in the fu-
ture. Those who liked to work long hours. And those who could perform

30. Murray, 1978, 167–91; quotation on page 191.

31. Gordon, 2004.

86  chat R 9


150

120

English farm laborers - wage

90   Ache - strength

60

30         Ache - kilograms of meat per
hunter per day

0

0      10      20      30      40      50      60      70

Age

Figure 9.7 Lifetime output for hunter-gatherer versus agrarian societies. Data on hunting suc-
cess and strength from Walker et al., 2002, 653; English farm wages from Burnette, 2006.

formal calculations in a world of many types of inputs and outputs—of what
crop to profitably produce, how many inputs to devote to it, what land to
profitably invest in. And we see in England, from at least the Middle Ages on,
that  the kind of people who succeeded in the economic system—who accu-
mulated assets, acquired skills, became literate—were increasing their represen-
tation in each generation. Thus it is plausible that through the long agrarian
passage leading up to the Industrial Revolution man was becoming biologically
better adapted to the modern economic world.

This is not in any sense to say that people in settled agrarian economies
on the eve of the Industrial Revolution had become “smarter” than their
counterparts in hunter-gatherer societies. For, as Jared Diamond points out,
the  skills that ensure the survival and reproduction of hunter-gatherers are
many and complex.32 This is illustrated by figure 9.7, which shows the

32. Diamond even goes so far as to argue that selection in agrarian economies would be
based on resistance to epidemic diseases that arise with more concentrated populations, so
that the people of forager societies were more intelligent than those of long-settled agrarian
economies; Diamond, 1997, 18–22.

th  R G c o o R  a  87


earnings profile of a group of agricultural laborers with age in England in the
1830s, alongside the earnings profile of Ache hunters (measured in kilograms
of meat per hunter per day). An English farm laborer reached peak earnings
around age 20, while for an Ache hunter the peak did not come until the early
40s. This was so despite the fact that the Ache reached the peak of their phys-
ical strength in their 20s.33

Clearly hunting, unlike agricultural labor, was a complex activity that
took years to master. The argument is not that agrarian society was making
people smarter. For the average person the division of labor that agrarian so-
ciety entailed made work simpler and more repetitive. The argument is in-
stead that it rewarded with economic and hence reproductive success a certain
repertoire of skills and dispositions that were very different from those of the
pre-agrarian world, such as the ability to perform simple repetitive tasks hour
after  hour, day after day. There is nothing natural or harmonic, for example,
in having a disposition to work even when all the basic needs of survival have
been achieved.

The strength of the selection process through survival of the richest also
seems to have varied depending on the circumstances of settled agrarian soci-
eties. Thus in the frontier conditions of New France (Québec) in the seven-
teenth century, where land was abundant, population densities low, and wages
extremely high, the group that reproduced most successfully was the poorest
and  the most illiterate.34 The more stable a society was, the less reproductive
success could be attained by war and conquest, the better chance these mech-
anisms had to operate.

Thus it is no real surprise that China, despite nearly a generation of ex-
treme forms of Communism between 1949 and 1978, emerged unchanged as
a society individualist and capitalist to its core. The effects of the thousands
of years of operation of a society under the selective pressures of the Malthu-
sian regime could not be uprooted by utopian dreamers.

We saw in chapter 8 that economics is founded on the idea that different
economic outcomes across societies are the product of the incentives created
by different social institutions. Given the same incentives and information
everyone will act the same way—economically. This chapter established that,

33. This pattern of a late peak in maximum hunting ability is common for male subsis-
tence hunters.

34. Hamilton and Clark, 2006.

88  chat R 9


in terms of the history of the preindustrial, world this assumption is unten-
able. People’s basic preferences were changing as the world approached the
Industrial Revolution, shaped by Malthusian pressures.

In the chapters that follow we shall consider how these selective pres-
sures, and their differential strength across societies, might help explain the
timing, location, and nature of the Industrial Revolution.

th  R G c o o R  a  89



PA RT I I

The Industrial Revolution



  Modern Growth:

The Wealth of Nations

Behold, I make a covenant. Before all your people I will do marvels, such as have
not been wrought in all the earth or in any nation.

—King James Bible, Exodus 34:10

Around 1800, in northwestern Europe and North America, man’s long so-
journ in the Malthusian world ended. The iron link between population and
living standards, through which any increase in population caused an im-
mediate decline in wages, was decisively broken. Between 1770 and 1860, for
example, English population tripled. Yet real incomes, instead of plummeting,
rose (figure 10.1). A new era dawned.

The seemingly sudden and unpredictable escape from the dead hand of
the Malthusian past in England around 1800, this materialist crossing of the
Jordan, was so radical that it has been forever dubbed the Industrial Revolution.
The Industrial part of the label is, however, unfortunate and misleading.

It was conferred mainly because the most observable of the many changes
in England was the enormous growth of the industrial sector: cotton mills,
potteries, foundries, steel works. Most Malthusian economies had 70 or even
80 percent of the population employed in agriculture. By 1861 that share had
dropped to 21 percent in England. But that switch to industry, as we shall see,
was due to the idiosyncrasies of England’s geography and demography. There
is, in fact, nothing inherently industrial about the Industrial Revolution.
Since 1800 the productivity of agriculture has increased by as much as that
of the rest of the economy, and without these gains in agriculture modern
growth would have been impossible. We have to resign ourselves to the fact
that one of the defining events in human history has been mislabeled.

Material well-being has marched upward in successful economies since the
Industrial Revolution to levels no one in 1800 could have imagined. Figure 10.2

93


100


80

1260s

1760s

60

1640s

40

20

0

0         5         10         15         20         25

Population (millions)

Figure . Real income per person and population in England by decade from the 1260s.

shows, for example, income per capita in England by decade from the 1260s
to the 2000s. After six hundred years of stasis, income has increased nearly
tenfold since 1800. It continues its inexorable rise. Note, however, that
though the conventional date for the onset of the Industrial Revolution in
Britain is given as the 1760s there is little sign of rapid growth of income per
person until the decade of the 1860s.

As a result of the Industrial Revolution the citizens of the economically
successful countries—such as Britain, the United States, France, and Japan—
are enormously richer than their Malthusian ancestors.

Another unusual feature of the modern economy, however, is that the
gap between the living standards of people in rich and poor economies today
is an enormous chasm, compared to that in the era before 1800. In the pre-
industrial epoch societies with the most favorable demographic factors could
attain incomes perhaps three to four times those of societies with the least
favorable demographic regimes. They looked down on their less favored
brethren from a modest knoll. Now the richest countries stand on a moun-
tain compared to the poorest. The gap between rich and poor in the modern
world is on the order of 40:1.

94  chat R  


600


500

Industrial
Revolution

400

300

200

100

0

1200    1300    1400    1500    1600    1700    1800    1900    2000

Figure .2 Real income per person in England, 1260s–2000s.

Most of the change in the structure of economic life in the advanced
economies can be traced directly to one simple fact: the unprecedented, in-
exorable, all-pervading rise in incomes per person since 1800. The lifestyle of
the average person in modern economies was not unknown in earlier soci-
eties: it is that of the rich in ancient Egypt or ancient Rome. What is different
is that now paupers live like princes, and princes live like emperors.

As incomes increase, consumers switch spending between goods in very
predictable ways. We have already seen that the increase in demand with
income varies sharply across goods. Most importantly, food consumption
increases little once we reach high incomes. Thus in Germany real incomes
per person rose by 133 percent from 1910 to 1956, while food consumption per
person rose by only 7 percent, calorie consumption per person fell by 4 per-
cent, and protein consumption fell by 3 percent. Indeed the calorie content
of the modern European diet is little higher than that of the eighteenth cen-
tury, even though people are ten to twenty times wealthier.1 The character of

1. People in the eighteenth century engaged in heavy manual labor, walked to work and
market, and lived in poorly heated homes, so they easily burned off these calories without the
modern problem of obesity.

o R  GR Ow th   95


the diet, however, has switched toward more expensive calorie sources. As
people become sated with calories their demand for variety, in the form of
more expensive foods, becomes insatiable: goodbye bread, hello sushi.

Thus as income marched upward the share of farm products in con-
sumption treaded downward, and the share of farmers among producers de-
clined in step. In preindustrial economies farmers made up 50–80 percent of
the population. Today, if we had a free market in food, 2 percent of the pop-
ulation could feed everyone. The farm population share in the United States,
for example, is 2.1 percent. Half of these people are kept in farming by gov-
ernment subsidies that futilely try to stem the inexorable exodus from the
land and from rural communities. A mountain of European Union subsidies
keeps 3.3 percent of the French in their beloved campagne. The less senti-
mental British, with a more efficient agriculture, employ only 1.2 percent of
the population in farming.2 The Industrial Revolution looks peculiarly in-
dustrial largely because of the switch of population and production out of
agriculture and into industry thanks to higher incomes.

The switch of labor out of agriculture has profoundly affected social life.
In Malthusian societies most of the population lived in small rural settle-
ments of a few hundred souls. They had to be close to the daily grind of their
work in the fields, since they walked to work. In the southeast of England, for
example, villages in the eighteenth century were on average only two miles
apart. Typically they had fewer than a hundred residents. The countryside was
densely settled because of all the labor required in inefficient preindustrial
agriculture: plowing, reaping, threshing, hauling manure, tending animals.

With an ever-dwindling proportion of the population tied to the land
through agriculture, modern populations are footloose. People can locate any-
where, but they have concentrated increasingly in urban centers because of
the richer labor market and the social amenities they offer. In particular the
rise of the two-wage-earner family makes denser urban labor markets attrac-
tive to people, despite the costs associated with huge agglomerations. The ur-
banization of rich economies has, in turn, produced the many social changes
we associate with industrial society. Income—the unending, inexorable rise
in income—drives all this change. Why are we on the march to endless wealth?

2. Data for the year 2000 are from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. Densely populated Britain does, however, import about half its food requirements.

96  chat R  


Explaining Modern Growth

Modern economies seem on the surface to be breathtakingly complex ma-
chines whose harmonic operation is nearly miraculous. Hundreds of thou-
sands of different types of goods are sold in giant temples of consumption.
The production, distribution, and retailing of these products, from paper
cups to personal espresso machines, involves the integration and coopera-
tion of thousands of different types of specialized machines, buildings, and
workers. Understanding why and how economies grow would seem to re-
quire years of study and Ph.D.-level training. But in fact understanding the
essential nature of modern growth, and the huge intellectual puzzles it
poses, requires no more than basic arithmetic and elementary economic
reasoning.

For, although modern economies are deeply complex machines, they
have at heart a surprisingly simple structure. We can construct a simple model
of this complex economy and in that model catch all the features that are rel-
evant to understanding growth.

The model reveals that there is one simple and decisive factor driving
modern growth. Growth is generated overwhelmingly by investments in
expanding the stock of production knowledge in societies. To understand
the Industrial Revolution is to understand why such activity was not pres-
ent or was unsuccessful before 1800, and why it became omnipresent after
1800.

The simple model collapses the immense complexity of all economies
down to just five summary variables: output Y, labor L, physical capital K,
land Z, and the level of efficiency A. In this picture of the economy it is a
giant machine that receives inputs of physical capital, labor, and land and turns
them into a single sausage-like output, with A indexing how much output is
received per unit of input. Since we will be thinking in terms of output per
worker, capital per worker and so on, lowercase letters will denote a “per
worker” quantity. Thus K is capital, and k is capital per worker.

We need to specify how these quantities are related. And here again we
find that, despite the huge variety of economies in our world, there is a simple
relationship that holds for all time and in all places, the fundamental equation
of  growth:

gy = agk + cgz + gA,

o R  GR Ow th   97


where gy, gk, gz, and gA are, respectively, the growth rates of output per
worker, capital per worker, land per worker, and efficiency.3 When we are
looking at long-run growth the efficiency term measures overwhelmingly the
sophistication of the technology of the society; a and c are the shares of out-
put received by the owners of capital and land.

This equation shows the percentage change in output per worker result-
ing from a 1 percent change in either capital per worker, land per worker, or
efficiency. It is a matter of only a brief formal argument, given in the techni-
cal appendix to this book, to demonstrate this basic connection.

Some of the elements of this equation are obvious and intuitive. If the ef-
ficiency of the economy grows by 1 percent, then so does output per person.
Less intuitive, but nevertheless clear, is the effect of more capital per person. If
we increase the capital stock per person by 1 percent we only increase output
per person by the amount a, the share of capital in national income. Since
that share is typically about 0.24, this implies that, if we expand the capital
stock per person by 1 percent, we increase output by only 0.24 percent.

This implies that growing faster by investing in more capital is costly. The
ratio of physical capital to output in richer modern economies averages about
3:1. To increase the capital stock per person by 1 percent requires switching
3 percent of current output from consumption to investment. But for that
switch is purchased an increase in income in future years of only 0.24 percent.
The first surprising implication of this fundamental growth equation is
that,  in the modern world, land per person, which had completely dominated
income determination before 1800, no longer matters in economic growth.
This  is because land rents have fallen to only a few percent of total output in
modern high-income economies. Figure 10.3 shows this trend for England.
Farmland rents, which were 23 percent of national income in 1760, fell to 0.2
percent by 2000. In part this decrease was offset by a rise in the site rental
value of urban land. But by 2000 urban land rents represented only 4 percent
of national income, even in crowded England with its very high housing

costs. Thus, although population growth tends to make gz negative in mod-
ern economies, this drag on income is inconsequential at present. Indeed so
unimportant is land in the current economy that for most purposes econo-

mists simplify the fundamental equation of growth to the even more stark

3. Robert Solow first derived this result in Solow, 1956, though he had predecessors, as
discussed in Griliches, 1996.

98  chat R  


30

25

20

15


10          Farmland rents

All rents

5

Urban site rents

0

1750       1800       1850       1900       1950       2000

Figure .3 Land rents as a share of income in England, 1750s–2000s. Income from Clark,
2007b. Urban land rents 1845–1913 from Singer, 1941, 224. Urban land rents 1947–2004 esti-
mated from the difference between the asset value of dwellings and structures in the United
Kingdom and the net capital stock embodied in these, assuming a 3 percent return on land un-
til  1997, when the rent was estimated from dwelling rent trends. Urban land rents in other years
estimated from the value of the housing stock; data from Clark, 2007b.

gy ≈ agk + gA.

Whereas in the preindustrial world the amount of land per person was a cru-
cial determinant of the wealth of a society, now it is largely irrelevant, except
for a few resource-abundant economies. Countries like Singapore and Japan,
with very little land per person, can be just as rich as those, like Australia,
with huge amounts.

Thus, despite all the complexities of economies since the Industrial Rev-
olution, the persistent growth we have witnessed since 1800 can be the result
of  only two changes: more capital per worker and greater efficiency of the
production process. At the proximate level all modern growth in income per
person  is that simple!

This conclusion has been derived for an economy with only one output,
one type of labor, one type of land, and one type of capital (which is just
stored-up output). But it generalizes easily into an analogous expression for
realistic economies, as the technical appendix details.

o R  GR Ow th   99


Table . Modern Economic Growth, 1960–2000

Growth   Growth    Share of    Percentage of
rate of y   rate of k   capital in   output growth

Country         (%)      (%)     income, a    from capital

New Zealand      1.18     1.55      0.27       35

United States      1.75     1.59      0.20       18

Australia        1.97     1.65      0.30       25

United Kingdom    2.40     2.87      0.23       27

Germany        3.29     3.07      0.25       23

Ireland         4.20     3.98      0.15       14

Japan          4.47     5.34      0.27       32

Sources: Capital and output from Kamps, 2004. Work hours 1970–2000 from OECD. Labor
force 1961–70 from Earth Trends. Capital share in income 1985–2000 from OECD produc-
tivity database.

Note: y is output per worker-hour, k is capital per worker-hour.

The second surprising implication of the fundamental equation is that
physical capital accumulation directly explains only a quarter of the growth of
output per person since the Industrial Revolution. Efficiency advance ex-
plains the other three-quarters.

To see this we note that the physical capital stock of economies since the
Industrial Revolution has grown at roughly the same rate as output. Thus
the ratio of capital to output has remained surprisingly unchanged. For the
OECD economies it is estimated at 2.93 in the 1960s compared to 2.99 in
2000–01.4 Table 10.1 shows the figures for the growth rate of output per work
hour and capital per work hour for 1960 to 2000 for a group of these
economies. On average for a group of twenty-two OECD economies the
growth rates were the same in this interval.

Since on average the share of capital rental payments in income was only

0.24 for these economies, this implies that only about a quarter of the growth
of output per work hour stems from physical capital investments. The bulk
of the growth is explained by advances in efficiency.

The efficiency term in the above equation, gz, is frequently referred to as
the residual. This is because, while the other terms in the equation can be di-

4. Kamps, 2004.

2  chat R  


Table .2

2000

Replacement Cost of the Human Capital Stock in the United States,

Cost per  Labor   Direct   Foregone
person)   force  social cost  earnings

Education       Period   ($)   (millions)  ($ billions)  ($ billions)

Less than high school   10   77,000    11     879      0

High school       12   122,000    63     5,963    1,767

Some college       14   199,000    32     4,167    2,155

Some postgraduate    16   312,000    35     7,075    3,727

Labor force           183,000   141    18,084    7,650

Source: United States, Census Bureau, 2002, tables 198, 199, 210, and 211.

Note: The foregone earnings per year are assumed for each level of education to be 70 percent
of the average wage and salary compensation earned by a person aged 25–29 with education
at the next lowest level. (This is assuming that students take classes or study for 1,350 hours
per school year—undoubtedly an overestimate.)

rectly measured and calculated, efficiency growth is simply a balancing quan-
tity thrown in to make the sides equate. It is, in the famous phrase of Moses
Abramovitz, merely a “measure of our ignorance.”5 It is the difference be-
tween  what we see and what economists can account for. For the typical suc-
cessful economy the measured efficiency with which inputs are translated into
outputs has risen at 1 percent or more per year since the Industrial Revolution.

The residual can be reduced a little by expanding the measure of capital
to also include human capital, the investments made in the education and
training of workers. Unskilled, uneducated workers produce much less than
skilled, educated ones. Part of this gain in productivity is attributable to the
investment in skills and education.

Table 10.2 shows a rough estimate of the value of the human capital stock
per worker, and for the economy as a whole, in the United States in 2000.
The labor force is divided into four broad education categories—less than high
school, high school, some college, and some postgraduate training—and the
associated capital cost of each type of worker is listed. These costs include
both direct expenditures for teachers and classrooms and the indirect expen-
ditures of wages sacrificed by spending time in schooling. The average U.S.

5. Abramovitz, 1956.

o R  GR Ow th   2


worker now embodies as much as $183,000 in capital. In the economy as a
whole there was about $26 trillion of human capital.

The stock of physical capital per worker in the United States in 2000 was
still somewhat greater at $210,500, but the calculation here shows the impor-
tance of human capital in modern economies. The share of income derived
from this human capital investment per worker, assuming a 10 percent re-
turn on the investment, was 26 percent, compared to 20 percent for physical
capital.6

Thus the true share of income earned by capital in the modern United
States might be 46 percent of all income. But it is also evident that account-
ing for human capital alone, while it reduces the size of the residual, does not
eliminate increased efficiency as an important source of growth. Thus if we
estimate the fundamental equation of growth for the United States in the
years 1990–2000, even with human capital included, residual productivity
growth was 1.36 percent per year, which was still a full 72 percent of the growth
of output per worker-hour.7

In earlier times, such as in England during the Industrial Revolution, the
stock of human capital was much smaller, since most people had not even
completed grade school. Thus counting it reduces the size of the residual, but
the residual is still the major direct explanator of growth.

What generates the residual? It stems from a largely unmeasured form of
capital accumulation: innovation. This comprises the myriad of investments,
small and large, made by producers each year to try to improve the efficiency
of their production processes.

Knowledge that is proprietary, that is legally owned, is counted in the
modern capital stock, since it is an asset of firms that earns them a return.
Table 10.3 shows the capital stock in the United Kingdom in 1990, separated
into structures, plants and machinery, vehicles, and intangible capital (which
includes patent rights and other forms of proprietary knowledge). But such

6. George Psacharopoulos calculated the social rate of return to education in the richer
economies in 1993 as 14.4 percent per year for primary education, 10.2 percent for secondary
education, and 8.7 percent for higher education; Psacharopoulos, 1994. But this probably ex-
aggerates the true return to capital, since Psacharopoulos attributed all the increase in wages of
the more highly educated to their education.

7. Income per worker-hour grew at 1.9 percent per year. Growth in physical capital, at

1.3 percent per year, explained 0.36 percent of this. Human capital grew at 0.7 percent, ex-
plaining another 0.18 percent.

22  chat R  


Table .3 U.K. Capital Stock, 1990

Share in stock    Share in rental payments

Type of capital           (%)            (%)

Structures             72             54

Plants and machinery       17            31

Vehicles              10             12

Intangibles             1             3

Source: Oulton, 2001.

knowledge constitutes only a tiny share of the modern capital stock, even if
we measure capital by how much rent it earns (which is higher in the case of
intangible capital).

The legal system gives protection only to certain classes of new ideas,
and then only for a limited period. After that they enter the common pool of
knowledge available to all. But most of the knowledge capital of the modern
economy is not owned by anyone; it is available free for all to use and so
would not get counted in this way. It cannot be kept private by its creators
and so is utilized for free by others.

The difficulty of profiting from the creation of knowledge is revealed, for
example, by the emblematic industry of the Industrial Revolution, cotton
textiles. In the next chapter we will learn that about half the measured effi-
ciency gains of the Industrial Revolution stemmed from textile innovations.
Yet the typical earnings of the entrepreneurs in textiles—who were remaking
the world in which they lived—were no higher than those in such stagnant
sectors as retailing or boot and shoe making. The gains from their innovations
were instead flowing to consumers in England and across the world in the form
of lower prices for textile products.

The time and energy that innovators invested in new methods thus yielded
a much higher social return than the meager private return they reaped. To
eliminate the appearance of free efficiency growth external benefits must be
added into the private return on capital in calculating a.

Thus the fundamental equation of growth actually reduces, for the world
since the Industrial Revolution, to the approximate expression

gy <≈ a*gk*,

o R  GR Ow th   23


where k* is an augmented measure of capital, which includes all the capital
stock of the economy—physical capital, human capital, and knowledge
capital—and a* is an augmented expression for the share of income in the
economy that would flow to capital, were all the spillover benefits from in-
vestment in knowledge directed to the investors.

Note, however, that when we arrive at this final truth as to the nature of
modern growth we have lost all ability to empirically test its truth. It is a
statement of reason and faith, not an empirical proposition. Physical capital
can be measured, as can the share of capital income in all income in the econ-
omy. But the generalized spillovers from innovation activities are not in prac-
tice measurable. Nor is the total amount of activity designed to improve
production processes measurable. Investments in innovation occur in all
economies. But unknown factors speed and retard this process across differ-
ent epochs and different economies.

Innovation Explains All Modern Growth

The fundamental equation of growth seems to suggest that growth since the
Industrial Revolution has had two independent sources. Most important is
efficiency growth fueled by investment in knowledge capital, which has large
social external benefits that show up in the residual. But there is also a sub-
stantial contribution from investments in physical capital and human capital,
which explains 30–50 percent of the growth in income per person.

But the efficiency growth from innovation is actually the true source of
all growth, and it also explains the growth of physical capital. The apparently
independent contribution of physical capital to modern growth is illusory.

If efficiency advances and physical capital were truly independent sources
of modern income growth, then there would be economies with rapid growth
of physical capital per person, but no efficiency gains, and economies with
rapid efficiency gains but little growth of physical capital per person. In prac-
tice, both across time and across countries at any given time, the growth of the
capital stock and efficiency growth are always closely associated in free market
economies.8

8. Command economies such as the old USSR were characterized by rapid capital accu-
mulation but slow efficiency advance.

24  chat R  


dy ₀

dy ₁

dy ₀

k ₀                   k ₁

Capital per worker

Figure .4  Growth rates for efficiency versus growth rates for capital per worker, 1960–2000.
Capital and output from Kamps, 2004. Work hours 1970–2000 from OECD. Size of labor force
1961–70 from Earth Trends.

Figure 10.4, for example, shows for a group of OECD countries at dif-
ferent income levels their efficiency growth rates from 1960 to 2000 com-
pared to their capital growth rates per worker. Even though capital stocks are
notoriously difficult to measure, the correlation between capital growth and
efficiency growth is close.

When two variables are so closely correlated one must cause the other.9
The growth in efficiency must also be driving up the stock of capital per
worker. The process through which this occurs is shown in figure 10.5.

The lower curve in the figure shows the output in an economy of given
efficiency level as a function of the stock of physical capital employed per
worker, k. Adding more capital always increases output, but at a smaller and
smaller rate as the capital stock per worker increases. Investors will expand the
stock of capital to the point k₀ where the net additional output created from

9. Or there could be a single independent cause for both.

o R  GR Ow th   25


dy ₀

dy ₁

dy ₀

k ₀                   k ₁

Figure .5 The effect of efficiency gains on capital stock.

another $1 of capital, dy₀, equals the real interest cost of $1. Thus the real in-
terest rate, the price of capital, determines the capital stock in any economy.
An increase in efficiency moves the production curve upward everywhere,

as figure 10.5 shows. It also increases the net additional output from adding
more capital, to dy₁ in the diagram. Thus investors buy more capital until
once again the return equals the interest rate at the new capital stock k₁. At
the new capital stock once again addition of a unit of capital increases output
by dy₀. So as long as interest rates do not change, innovation induces physi-
cal capital investment.

Thus a 1 percent increase in the efficiency of the economy though inno-
vation leads to an increase in output of more than 1 percent because it induces
more physical capital accumulation.

The shape of the production function in modern economies, depicted in
figure 10.5, is such that the ratio of physical capital to output has changed lit-
tle since the Industrial Revolution, as a result of these induced investments
from technological advance. That implies that the growth of the physical cap-
ital stock has been as fast as the growth of output. In that case the direct ef-
fect of technological advance, plus the indirect effect from induced investment,

26  chat R  


makes a 1 percent gain in efficiency create about a 1.3 percent gain in output.
Thus


gy ≈ gk

≈ ——– .

(1 – a)

Thus investments in knowledge capital that generate efficiency growth
not only explain most modern economic growth at a proximate level, they
explain all modern growth.

The Agenda

Enhanced production of knowledge capital, seemingly starting around 1800,
generated great external benefits throughout the economy. This increased the
measured efficiency of the economy, and with it the stock of physical and hu-
man capital. Thus the path to explaining the vital event in the economic his-
tory of the world, the Industrial Revolution, is clear. All we need explain is
why in the millennia before 1800 there was in all societies—warlike, peaceful,
monotheist, polytheist—such limited investment in the expansion of useful
knowledge, and why this circumstance changed for the first time in Britain
some  time around 1800. Then we will understand the history of mankind. The
next chapter details some approaches to this problem and considers why the
timing of the Industrial Revolution remains so difficult to explain.

o R  GR Ow th   27


  The Puzzle of the Industrial Revolution

So the Industrial Revolution was the only significant event that happened in all
world economic history. And you have no explanation for the Industrial Revolu-
tion. What kind of theory is this?

—Irad Kimhi (personal communication, 2006)

The mystery of why the Industrial Revolution was delayed until around 1800
is the great and enduring puzzle of human history. In this chapter I outline
what makes explaining the Industrial Revolution an almost impossible chal-
lenge and describe various attempts to resolve this challenge.

We have seen that economic growth after 1800 was the product of small,
but highly productive, investments in expanding the stock of useful knowl-
edge in societies. Since most of the benefits of these investments did not flow
to the investors, the result was a seemingly costless expansion of the efficiency
of the economy. These gains in efficiency in turn induced more investment in
physical capital. We also saw that the average rate of expansion of technology
before 1800 was extremely slow.

What makes the Industrial Revolution so difficult to understand is the
need to comprehend why—despite huge variation in the customs, mores, and
institutions of preindustrial societies—none of them managed to sustain even
moderate rates of productivity growth, by modern standards, over any signif-
icant time period. What was different about all preindustrial societies that
generated such low and faltering rates of efficiency growth? What change to
such   a stable nongrowth configuration generated the Industrial Revolution?

Theories of the Industrial Revolution

This book adopts a particular view of the Industrial Revolution: that it emerged
only millennia after the arrival of institutionally stable economies in societies

208


such as ancient Babylonia, because in the interim institutions themselves
interacted with and changed human culture. Millennia of living in stable
societies, under tight Malthusian pressures that rewarded effort, accumulation,
and fertility limitation, encouraged the development of cultural forms—in
terms of work inputs, time preference, and family formation—which facil-
itated modern economic growth.

In part I argue that, given the nature of the question, there is no other ex-
planation which can meet the exacting standards required of any theory of the
Industrial Revolution. For the existing theories, offered by a variety of his-
torians, economic historians, economic theorists, and sociologists, end up
falling into three basic types, each of which faces characteristic difficulties.

Exogenous Growth Theories. Some feature outside the economy, such as

the legal institutions of the society or the relative scarcities of different inputs
in production, changed. This change induced investment in expanding pro-
duction techniques by potential innovators within economies. Such a change
would include, for example, changes in the institutions governing the appro-
priability of knowledge or the security of all property. Thus Douglass North
and Barry Weingast argue that the arrival of the constitutional monarchy in
England in 1689 was a key political innovation that ushered in modern eco-
nomic growth.1 These theories would predict that we will find in England in
1760 or soon before, or perhaps more widely in Europe, institutional forms
or other social innovations not seen in earlier societies. An example of such a
theory might be Joel Mokyr’s view that the Enlightenment in Europe was a
key stimulant of the Industrial Revolution, though Mokyr would argue that
the Enlightenment itself had its roots in the earlier commercial expansion of
the European economy.2

Multiple Equilibrium Theories. Some shock—disease, war, conquest of new
lands—led the economy to jump from the bad, stagnant equilibrium to the
good, dynamic equilibrium of the modern world. A particular class of theories
that has recently attracted adherents in economics is one in which families
switch from an equilibrium under which everyone has large numbers of chil-
dren (each of whom they invest little time in) to one under which families
have small numbers of children (on whom they lavish much attention).3

1. North and Weingast, 1989.

2. Mokyr, 2005.

3. Lucas, 1988, 2002; Becker et al., 1990.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o  209


Endogenous Growth Theories. Some feature internal to the economic sys-
tem evolved over time in the long preindustrial era to eventually create the
preconditions for modern economic growth. The Industrial Revolution was
thus predetermined from the time the first human appeared on the African
savannah. It was just a matter of time before the economic conditions for
rapid technological progress were created. The question then is: What is dif-
ferent about the economy of England in 1760, compared to Florence in 1300,
China in 500, Rome at the time of Christ, or Athens at the time of Plato?
Posited internal drivers of the economic system that eventually created the
Industrial Revolution have included the size of the population itself and an
evolution of the characteristics of the population.4

This chapter reviews the major variants of these three theories before we
examine the Industrial Revolution in detail, to consider whether it conforms
with or contradicts any or all of them.

Exogenous Growth Theories

For economists the great exogenous force that is continually invoked as shap-
ing the lives of men and the fates of economies is the institutions that govern
society—determining who owns what, how secure property is, and how prop-
erty gets transferred. The preferred assumption is that the desires and ration-
alities of people in all human societies are essentially the same. The medieval
peasant in Europe, the Indian coolie, the Yanomamo of the rain forest, the
Tasmanian Aboriginal, all share a common set of aspirations and a common
ability to act rationally to achieve those aspirations. What differs across soci-
eties, however, are the institutions that govern economic life. If sustained
rapid productivity advance is not observed before 1800 in any society, it must
be because all these societies were even worse at rewarding innovation than
our own. Thus

Institutions form the incentive structure of a society, and the political and
economic institutions, in consequence, are the underlying determinants
of economic performance.5

4. Kremer, 1993b; Galor and Weil, 2000.

5. North, 1994, 359.

20  chat R  


Consider how the . . . economy would behave in the absence of prop-
erty rights. In this case, innovators would be unable to earn the profits
that encourage them to undertake research in the first place, so that no
research would take place. With no research, no new ideas would be
created, technology would be constant, and there would be no per capita
growth in the economy. Broadly speaking, just such a situation prevailed
in  the world prior to the Industrial Revolution.6

Studying institutions sheds light on why some countries are rich and
others poor   The quality of these institutional foundations of the

economy and the polity is paramount in determining a society’s welfare.7

The advantage of a theory which relies on an exogenous shock to the eco-
nomic system is that it can perhaps account for the seemingly sudden change
in the growth rate of measured efficiency around 1800. Institutions can change
suddenly and dramatically—witness the French Revolution, the Russian Rev-
olution, or the 1979 Iranian Revolution that overthrew the Shah.

The sophisticated proponents of such theories among economic historians
realize, however, that the difference in institutions between technologically
static preindustrial societies and modern growth economies, as we have seen,
must be relatively subtle.8

Yet this approach exerts its powerful hold over the economics profession
in part because of the limited historical knowledge of most economists. The
caricature many modern economists have of the world before the Industrial
Revolution is a mixture of all the bad movies ever made about early societies:
Vikings pour out of long ships to loot and pillage defenseless peasants and
burn the libraries of monasteries. Mongol hordes thunder out of the steppes
on horseback to sack Chinese cities. Clerical fanatics burn at the stake those
who dare to question arcane religious doctrines. Peasants groan under the heel
of rapacious lords, whose only activities are feasting and fighting. Aztec priests
wielding obsidian knives cut out the hearts of their screaming, writhing vic-
tims. In such a world, who has the time, the energy, or the incentive to de-
velop new technology?

6. Jones, 2002, 121.

7. Greif, 2006, 3–4.

8. See, for example, Greif, 2006.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o   2


Two considerations, however, suggest that exogenous growth theories
face almost insurmountable problems despite their grip on both economic
history and economists.

First, we shall see that there is no sign of any improvement in the appro-
priability of knowledge until long after the Industrial Revolution was well
under way.

Second, there is no evidence that institutions can, in the long run at least,
be a determining factor in the operation of economies, that is, independent
of the economic system. For there is another view of how institutions affect
economic life, that over the long run they adapt to the technology and rela-
tive prices of economies and play a secondary role in economic history. In-
terestingly enough this was the view of Douglass North in 1973 in The Rise of
the Western World, before he converted to the view that institutions are ex-
ogenous determinants of economic performance.9 Let us call this the “effi-
cient institutions” hypothesis.

The argument for such endogeneity of institutions is as follows. Eco-
nomic institutions, being just a set of rules about who owns what and how
ownership is determined, can be changed at little cost in terms of resources.
It typically costs no more to have efficient institutions, those that maximize
the potential output of a society, than to have inefficient institutions. If an in-
stitution impeded the production of the maximum potential output from a
society, there would be pressure to change it into one promoting greater effi-
ciency. Many people would gain from the change, and their net gains would
be bigger than the losses of the losers. They will thus find a way to compensate
the losers in order to persuade them to accept the change. Even preindustrial
people are not insensitive to material gain. Institutions destructive of output
will be reformed. Thus institutions vary across time and place mainly because
differences in technology, relative prices, and people’s consumption desires
make different social arrangements efficient.10

In this view institutions play no role in explaining long-run economic
development. Their evolution is interesting, but it is driven by more funda-
mental economic forces. Their history is also not important for explaining

9. North and Thomas, 1973.

10. This view in many ways echoes Marx’s famous statement that “The totality of these
relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on
which arises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of so-
cial consciousness”; Marx, 1904, 11.

22  chat R  


Figure . Fallen Lenin statue, Riga, Latvia.
The weak economic performance of Soviet-
style economies helped ensure the end of the
Soviet regime in Latvia in 1991, forty-six years
after its imposition.

current outcomes, since their origins will have little bearing on their current
functioning. Where you started from makes no difference: there is no path
dependence, at least in the long run, from institutional history.11

This “efficient institutions” view can accept, especially in dealing with
long-run history, that there may be periodic ideological pushes to adopt in-
efficient institutions as a result of episodes of religious fervor or social turmoil.
Examples of religious fervor would be the arrival of Christianity circa AD 30
in the Mediterranean, of Islam in AD 622 in the Middle East, or of Khomei-
nism in 1979 in Iran. Incidents of social turmoil would include the French
Revolution of 1789, the Russian Revolution of 1917, and the subsequent
Communist takeovers of North Korea in 1946 and China in 1949. But if the
new institutions are economically inefficient they will quickly (by historical
time) evolve toward efficiency.

11. Acemoglu et al., 2001, 2002, assert empirically that the past of societies really does pre-
dict the future.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o   23


History is full of instances of institutions that were over time subverted
and refashioned because they were inefficient. One example is the method of
deciding legal cases in medieval England by “wager of battle.” The Norman
conquerors of 1066 imported the right of a defendant in legal cases, includ-
ing property disputes, to prove his case in this way. In this procedure the de-
fendant would duel with the plaintiff in a ritualized combat that could be
fought to the death of one of the parties. The practice grew out of the war-
rior origins of Norman society and their belief that God would intervene to
favor the combatant in the right.12

From the earliest records, we know that the parties named champions to
fight these duels for them.13 The great religious houses—those with much
land and hence many territorial disputes—even kept champions in training.
Thus in 1287 the Abbey of Bury St. Edmunds fought a duel for possession
of two manors. The Abbey’s chronicle records that “The abbot paid a certain
champion called Roger Clerk . . . 20 marks in advance from his own money.
After  the duel Roger was to receive 30 marks more from him. The champion
during the whole time of waiting [for the battle] stayed with us, accompanied
by his trainer   On St. Calixtus’s day our enemies were victorious and our

champion slain in judicial combat in London. And so our manors of Semer
and Groton were lost without hope of any recovery.”14

Since the annual wages of a laborer at this time would be less than 3
marks, the champion who was to receive 50 marks if successful was a highly
skilled worker. Unlike Roger Clerk in the example above, the men who
fought for pay generally did not fight to the death, and typically one would
yield before fatal injury.15 Wager of battle, it could be argued, was not an
institution that ensured productive land use or encouraged investment in
land.16

But as early as 1179 a tenant whose possession of land was challenged
could, for a price, apply to the royal courts for a “writ of peace” prohibiting

12. Von Moschzisker, 1922, 160; Russell, 1959, 242.

13. Until 1275 champions had to swear that they personally knew the facts of the case,
thus in many cases committing obvious perjury. This illustrates the elasticity of concepts like
truth when they prove institutionally inconvenient.

14. Gransden, 1964, 88–89.

15. Russell, 1959.

16. It is not clear, however, whether armed combat is any worse a way of settling disputes
than hiring high-priced attorneys to wield the niceties of legal theory in courtroom battles.

24  chat R  


battle and requiring the case be settled by a jury of twelve local knights. Since
the defendant could elect to settle the dispute by battle or by jury, duels were
still fought infrequently, when the party in possession of the land either knew
the title was in some way defective or feared the views of those neighbors
who would form the jury. Even though it formally persisted until 1819, the
right to be tried by combat fell into disuse in the 1300s, replaced completely
by the jury trial.17 Without any formal reformation the system evolved to a
more efficient state.

The evidence on whether institutions evolve toward efficiency is mixed.
But institutions with high social costs tend to disappear. Indeed the forces of
economic interest are so powerful that when an ideology conflicts with eco-
nomic interest the solution has generally been to adapt the ideology to resolve
the conflict.

An example is the payment of interest on loans. Under early Christianity,
and to this day in Islam, the taking of such interest was regarded as usury, an
immoral activity.18 The idea behind this, at least in the case of Christianity,
was that money by itself was sterile. If someone borrowed money, and repaid
it after a year, why should they have to pay interest for the loan? The money
itself was not capable of producing anything, so a bargain that required in-
terest was unjust to the borrower.

But banning all lending at interest frustrates many possible mutually
beneficial bargains in any economy. Thus under both Christianity and Islam
religious scholars soon sought ways of reconciling the pure principles of faith
with the profit opportunities of the market.

While the Catholic church formally adhered to the doctrine against usury
throughout the Middle Ages, ingenious theologians showed that most types
of  interest payment were actually non-usurious. Since the church itself was a
major lender, there was considerable pressure to find just such a reconciliation.

17. The 1819 repeal of “wager by battle” followed a celebrated case in 1817. The defendant,
Abraham Thornton, a bricklayer, was accused of raping and murdering Mary Ashford. After a
jury acquitted him her brother privately prosecuted Thornton for the murder. Under ingenious
legal advice, Thornton, a strapping youth, demanded trial by combat. The plaintiff refused to
fight, so the defendant won; Rayner and Crook, 1926, 167–71.

18. Modern Islam maintains the prohibition. The Koran prohibits “usury”: “GOD permits
commerce, and prohibits usury” [2.275]. Many Muslim countries have laws against the taking
of interest on loans. But Islamic scholars differ in their interpretation of whether usury is any
taking of interest or just the taking of excessive interest.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o   25


Thus by 1300 the following exceptions to the practice of collecting inter-
est on loans were all well accepted in Christian Europe:

1. Profits of partnership. As long as each partner took the risks, returns
were allowed on capital directly invested in an enterprise (i.e., equity
finance was allowed).

2.  Rent charges. Anyone could sell a proportion of rent on land or a
house in return for a lump sum. Thus a perpetual loan secured by
real estate was allowed. Indeed the church itself bought many rent
charges as an investment for its substantial endowment.

3. Annuities. An annuity is a fixed annual payment made in return for
a lump sum until the person named in the annuity dies. This was
permissible since the amount of the payment was uncertain. The
Prior of Winchester sold these, and they were also popular in many
German cities.

4. Foregone profits. A lender could collect compensation for profits
foregone in making a loan.

5. Exchange risk premium. A lender could collect a premium on a loan
if it was made in one currency and repaid in another, to cover the
exchange rate risk. To exploit this loophole lenders would draw up
contracts in which they lent across foreign currencies twice in one
transaction, so eliminating all currency risk but still collecting the
premium.

The formal prohibition on usury had very little cost to preindustrial
Christian society. It outlawed only certain types of bond finance. Since there
was  still a demand for such loans this was met in two ways. The first was by
allowing Jews, as non-Christians, to engage in such lending. The second was
by simply ignoring the church rules when it proved convenient. Large-scale
finance—lending to princes and the Vatican—was largely untouched by such
regulations. There was even an international financial crisis in 1341 when Ed-
ward   III of England defaulted on his debts, causing the bankruptcy of two of
the three largest banks in Europe (the Peruzzi in 1343 and the Bardi in 1346).
Islamic societies similarly found ingenious ways to circumvent the ban.

The primary one was the double sale. In this transaction the borrower would
get, for example, both 100 dinars cash and a small piece of cloth valued at the
absurdly high price of 15 dinars. In a year he would have to pay back 100 di-
nars for the loan of the cash, and 15 for the cloth. These debts were upheld by

26  chat R  


Sharia courts. A study of Islamic court records in the Ottoman Empire in the
sixteenth century found, even more blatantly, thousands of debt contracts
being enforced by the courts. Similarly the waqfs, the foundations set up by
pious Muslims to maintain mosques, pay imams, support the poor, or pro-
vide public goods, frequently held cash assets that they lent at interest.19 Even
modern Muslim states that ban usury have banking arrangements under
which depositors still collect interest on their money, though in a “partner-
ship” instead of explicitly as “interest.” Such banks currently operate in Egypt,
Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, and Malaysia.

In England usury itself became legal after the Catholic church was re-
placed by the Church of England, partly as a result of the marital problems
of Henry III. But for three hundred years the law fixed a maximum interest
rate. A loan violating the usury restriction was not legally enforceable. If the
legal interest rate had been set very low, it might have seriously interfered with
the capital market. But in practice the legal interest rate was normally set at
or above the free market rate. Loans to the crown were exempted from usury
restrictions. This was because the crown, an unreliable borrower, paid rates
well above the market rate before about 1710. Furthermore, the interest rates
specified in the usury laws were impossible to enforce, since the contracting
parties could easily inflate the size of the loan in the written contract in order
to circumvent the usury restrictions. Usury laws survived so long in England
because they imposed very little restriction on the economy.

We can find even more startling examples of the power of economic in-
terest to undermine ideology. In Western Samoa in the Pacific, for example,
the traditional rule in choosing chiefs was that the person be a close relative
of the previous chief. When interviewed by an anthropologist, people claimed
they observed these rules. To confirm the legitimacy of the chief elaborate lin-
eages were kept by each clan. But members have an economic interest in
choosing as chief a rich person, since one of the duties of the chief is to pro-
vide feasts for the clan. The solution that was frequently used was that the lin-
eages were distorted to make whoever was chosen seem more closely related
to the previous chief. The interviewer would find that the new chief was de-
scribed as more closely related to the previous chief than was in fact the case.20

19. Pamuk, 2006, 7–8.

20. The British colonial administrators upset this compromise system by keeping bureau-
cratic records that established once and for all the actual familial relationships of individuals;
Pitt, 1970.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o   27


Multiple Equilibrium Theories

To encompass not only institutions that evolve in response to economic pres-
sures but also the possibility that institutions can explain the Industrial Rev-
olution, we need a theory of persistent bad institutions. The key idea here
is  that while “bad” institutions always cost output as a whole, they can and
do benefit some individuals. If these individuals have the political or police
power to preserve the institution, then they will seek to preserve it whatever
the cost to society as a whole.

Thus medieval guilds, by keeping out new entrants, may have hurt out-
put in the economy as a whole. But they helped the existing guild members,
who therefore clung to the restrictions. The guilds in London in the years be-
fore 1688, for example, were politically powerful because they were able to raise
money from their members to help the king in times of need. The consumers
who might be hurt by the monopolistic guild regulations were less politically
powerful because they were a more diffuse group with less ability to organize
financial support for the king.

We can hence have a theory of institutions, a “political economy” of in-
stitutions, which explains their rise and fall in terms of the material interests
of a ruling class. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, for example, propose the
schema in figure 11.2 for any future theory of institutions. The basic driver of
societies is no longer their economies, as in the “efficient institutions” view,
but their political structure, as well as the distribution of resources among the
various political actors. Those who end up with political power will arrange
economic and political institutions to maximize their own economic benefits,
not the efficiency of the economy as a whole. The system can still be shocked
into changes by exogenous forces that change the income distribution and
hence political power within the current political institutions. But now dif-
ferences in initial political institutions or resource distributions can have long-
lasting effects.21

If the “political economy” of institutions is to explain the pervasive slow
growth before 1800, it must explain why early societies consistently had in-
stitutions that discouraged growth. For if institutions were chosen through
the interplay of various interest groups, or even if they were randomly chosen,

21. This is the structure of the argument about the economic success of former colonies
presented in Acemoglu et al., 2001, 2002, 2005a. Such a structure is also found in Engerman
and Sokoloff, 2002.

28  chat R  


Period t

Political institutions
Resource distribution

Economic institutions

Economic performance

Period t + 1

Political institutions
Resource distribution

Economic institutions

Economic performance

Figure .2 Politics as the economic driver. From Acemoglu et al., 2005b.

why would all societies in the thousands of years before 1800 end up with bad
institutions? Wouldn’t there be at least some that would by chance evolve
good institutions? There must be something systematic that kept early societies
from rewarding innovation. When the English arrived in Australia in 1788, to
find a society that had experienced no technological advances for fifty thou-
sand years, they also found that there were more than three hundred distinct
Aboriginal languages, including five among the five thousand inhabitants
of Tasmania alone. Thus there was not just one Aboriginal society that had
failed to show any technological advance, but more than three hundred.22

The common feature to which Douglass North, Mancur Olson, and oth-
ers point is that preindustrial societies were all “predatory states” ruled by
“stationary bandits” who maximized their reward at the expense of economic
efficiency. Only with the advent of democracy were economic institutions
developed that made modern economic growth possible.23 By the time
England achieved its Industrial Revolution it was a constitutional democracy

22. Blainey, 1975, 37–38.

23. North and Weingast, 1989; Olson, 1993.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o   29


in which the king was merely a figurehead.24 The United States, the lead-
ing nation in the world in economic terms since at least the 1870s, has also al-
ways been a democracy.25 Where a small class ruled by force a disjuncture
arose between the property rules that maximized growth and those that max-
imized the gains of the ruling elite.

Consider, for example, slave or serf societies: Haiti until 1793, the Amer-
ican South until 1860, Russia until 1861, Brazil until the 1880s. It is frequently
argued that slavery and serfdom were inefficient.26 Since the owner can seize
all the output at any time, it is difficult to give slaves incentives to produce
well. And the owner has to devote considerable resources to monitoring the
work of the slave. Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman cast doubt on these be-
liefs through their empirical work on slavery in the American South.27 But for
the sake of argument let us assume that slavery and serfdom were inefficient.

The statement that slavery is an inefficient institution is equivalent to
the statement that if we freed a slave the total output of the society would
increase. Suppose the output of a slave, the extra amount he or she produces
for  the owner, is ys. The slave’s marginal output as a free worker would then

be higher than that under slavery. The measure of the marginal output of a

free worker, the amount the worker adds to the output of society, is the
worker’s wage, w. Thus if slavery is inefficient

w > ys.

Suppose that the owners have to spend the equivalent of a wage of ws to feed,
clothe, and house slaves. The annual profit from owing a slave, the surplus he
or she produces, is thus

πs = ys – ws.

The surplus the freed slave produces, πf = w – ys, is greater than this. That
means that the slave could pay πs to the former master and still have a surplus
over his or her former subsistence consumption. The slave and the master can

24. The franchise was limited, however, being restricted to male property owners. Fur-
thermore, since the vote was taken by a public ballot, vote buying was common.

25. Though, again, a limited democracy for much of that time.

26. Serfdom was a form of slavery, widespread across preindustrial Europe, under which
the owner had property rights in the serf but custom limited the exactions.

27. Fogel and Engerman, 1974.

220  chat R  


Figure .3 Institutionalism?

reach an agreement giving each of them part of this surplus, and both would
be better off.

Thus if slavery really is a socially inefficient institution it should end
spontaneously, merely through market forces. There should be no need for
abolition movements or antislavery crusades. The Civil War would have been
unnecessary. Indeed in ancient Athens it was common for skilled slaves to live
on their own in the cities and simply make an annual payment to their owners,
who otherwise left them to their own devices. But suppose that the freed
slaves, instead of using their freedom to happily make their annual payments
to their former masters, organized and overthrew the unjust social order that
had condemned them to labor for the ruling class. Or suppose they used their
freedom to migrate to an adjacent society in which they would not have to
pay the annual exaction.

Given these possibilities, even though emancipation increases the total
amount of social product, it reduces the income to the ruling class. This sit-
uation is portrayed in figure 11.4. Stipulate, for example, that a society with
slavery produces a total surplus of 1 unit, which all goes to the ruling class.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o   22


Renege

(0,3)

Slaves


Emancipate

Keep
agreement

(2,1)

Masters

Keep
slavery

(1,0)

Figure .4 The emancipation decision analyzed.

The existing set of payoffs is shown as the number pair (1,0) in the bottom
part of the diagram, where the first number denotes the masters’ surplus, and
the second number the slaves’ surplus. Stipulate also that emancipation would
increase the total surplus to 3 units. Then the conditions for slaves buying
themselves out of slavery seem to exist.

In particular a deal by which after emancipation the masters get 2 units
of the new surplus, while the ex-slaves get 1 unit, should be accepted by both
parties. This outcome is shown as the path where the masters emancipate and
the ex-slaves keep to the agreement. But once emancipation occurs, suppose
that the ex-slaves get to control the distribution of income. Then they would
take all the surplus for themselves, leaving the masters worse off. In this situ-
ation slaves cannot commit to uphold the initial deal, and thus masters will
never agree to it. Without an outside arbiter of property rights, the agree-
ment, even though it increases output, will be rejected by the ruling class.

The case of slavery is just a specific example of what “institutionalists”
would argue is the general problem of preindustrial society: the unresolved
struggle over the distribution of goods and power limited output. Note,
however, that in many (but not all) preindustrial societies, slaves did buy
their own freedom, or worked independently and paid a fixed sum per year to
their owners. Thus, though there was a huge slave population in Roman Italy
around AD 1 as a result of captures in Roman conquests, by AD 200, with-

222  chat R  


out any emancipation movement, most of these slaves had disappeared. In
medieval England, although large numbers of slaves and serfs, making up the
majority of the population, were recorded in the Doomsday Book of 1086, all
slaves and serfs had been freed by 1500, without any emancipation movement.
So the general argument institutionalists would make is that preindustrial
elites—typically a military ruling class—did not undertake policies to foster
technological advance because economic growth would have seen the elites
expropriated. Somehow, through chance, a social structure emerged prior to
1800 in countries like England under which the interests of a larger share of
the population came to be represented in the government, which then was
induced to pursue economic efficiency. Why, however, did this happen only
once in the history of the preindustrial world? Why were there not many
societies in which the rulers were secure enough that they were happy to reap

the benefits of technological advance?

Human Capital

This argument that preindustrial society was stuck in a bad equilibrium has
taken other forms. The one that has recently attracted the most attention
from economic theorists is that in the Malthusian world parents were in-
duced to have large numbers of children, to each of whom they provided little
training or education. One of the great social changes in the advanced in-
dustrial economies since the Industrial Revolution is a decline in the number
of children to whom the average woman gave birth, from five or six to two or
fewer. Proponents of this interpretation, such as the Nobel laureates Gary
Becker and Robert Lucas, argue that this switch, induced by changing eco-
nomic circumstances, has been accompanied by a great increase in the time
and attention invested in each child. People are not the same in all societies.
With enough parental attention they can be transformed into much more ef-
fective actors. The continual efficiency growth of the modern world has thus
been created by the production of higher-quality people.

Chapter 9 gives evidence that literacy and numeracy had increased greatly
by the eve of the Industrial Revolution. We saw in chapter 10 that modern
growth is seemingly the product of an expansion of the knowledge stock by
investment in creating new production techniques. The institutional view
explained above assumes that the demand for innovation was increased by
better social institutions. But this alternative interpretation is that changes in

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o   223


Innovation
supply

Greater
rewards

More
supply

Innovation
demand

Figure .5 Demand and supply interpretations of the Industrial Revolution.

family size resulted in economic actors who were better educated and hence
more effective at producing new techniques. The quality of a human agent
depends on the time input of his or her parents, which in turn depends on
family size. The contrast between these views is portrayed in figure 11.5. The
proponents of institutional change as the cause see a change in the private
reward  to innovators as spurring the Industrial Revolution, while the propo-
nents of human capital investments see an increasing supply of innovations
at  a given private reward as the key. We thus need not see any increase in the
private returns to innovation in the Industrial Revolution under the human
capital interpretation.

What would motivate families to have fewer but better-educated children?
From the point of view of the individual family there must be some signal in
the form of higher relative earnings for educated children. But why would
such a change appear in the Malthusian economy? If education for children
is in part a consumer good purchased by parents, then one obvious trigger for
a change in behavior would be the higher incomes we have witnessed since
the onset of the Industrial Revolution. But this would imply that higher-
income families would have begun to reduce family size long before the In-
dustrial Revolution. And we saw in chapter 6 that in fact in the preindustrial

224  chat R  


world the effective family size, measured by the numbers of children alive at
the death of fathers, was significantly higher for higher-income parents, all the
way up to very high income levels.

Another possible cause of a reduction in child numbers in favor of fewer,
better-educated children would be an increase in the premium that the mar-
ket   offered for those children with better education. Here, however, we find
absolutely no evidence as we approach 1800 of any market signal to parents
that  they need to invest more in the education or training of their children.
Figure 9.4, for example, showed that the skill premium in the earnings of
building craftsmen relative to unskilled building laborers and assistants was
actually at its highest before the onset of the Black Death in 1348, when a
craftsman earned nearly double the wage of a laborer. If there was ever an in-
centive to accumulate skills it was in the early economy. Thereafter the pre-
mium declines to a lower but relatively stable level from about 1370 until 1900,
a period of over five hundred years, before declining further in the twentieth
century. Thus the time of the greatest market reward for skills and training
was long before the Industrial Revolution.

Proponents of a switch from a preindustrial low-human-capital equilib-
rium to a modern high-human-capital society are extraordinarily vague about
what would trigger the switch between equilibria. Becker, Murphy, and
Tamura, for example, argue that the transition was caused by “technological
and other shocks   improved methods to use coal, better rail and ocean

transports, and decreased regulation of prices and foreign trade.”28 But the
need here is for an explanation of these technological shocks.

A final empirical hurdle faced by human capital theories of the Industrial
Revolution is that the timing of the demographic transition in Europe and
the United States places it circa 1890, 120 years after the traditional dating of
the Industrial Revolution. Figure 11.6, for example, shows the demographic
transition in England and Sweden, two relatively well-documented countries.
In  both cases the decline in fertility does not start in any substantial way un-
til well into the late nineteenth century, a hundred years after the traditional
dating of the Industrial Revolution. We thus see a very poor timing match
among the elements that would seem to be needed for a human capital–based
interpretation of the Industrial Revolution—the revolution itself, the average
size    of families, and the premium paid in the labor market for skills.

28. Becker et al., 1990, S32–S33.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o   225


50

6

40

England, birth rate

England, TFR

30                                                 4

Sweden, birth rate

20

2

10

0                                                  0

1545   1595   1645   1695   1745   1795   1845   1895   1945   1995

Figure .6 The demographic transition in Europe.

Furthermore, for England we have proxy measures for literacy that go back
to 1580, such indicators as the percentage of grooms who signed the marriage
register or the percentage of witnesses in court cases signing their depositions.
These measures do show a long upward movement in implied literacy rates.
But as we saw in figure 9.3 they show very little change, at least for men, dur-
ing the years 1760–1860, the classic dates for the Industrial Revolution.

Endogenous Growth Theories

None of the above theories of institutional changes or of a switch between
equilibria explains why the Industrial Revolution had to happen—or why it
happened in 1760 as opposed to 1800 BC in ancient Babylonia or 500 BC in
ancient Greece. Endogenous growth theories attempt to explain not just how
the Industrial Revolution took place, but also why it occurred when it did.
They argue that there was an internal evolution of the economic system that
eventually led to modern growth.

A nice example of such an endogenous growth theory is that of Michael
Kremer. Kremer assumes that the social institutions that provide the incen-

226  chat R  


0.8

1875

0.6

0.4


0.2

1775

1825

0.0

0           500          1,000          1,500          2,000

World population (millions)

Figure .7 World population and growth rate of efficiency. World population is from the same
sources as for table 7.1. The rate of efficiency advance is estimated from population until 1850,
and thereafter from the fundamental equation of growth.

tives to individuals to create knowledge are the same in all societies. Each per-
son thus has a given probability of producing a new idea. In this case the
growth rate of knowledge will be a function of the size of the human com-
munity. The more people with whom you are in contact, the more you get to
benefit from the ideas of others. There was substantial but slow productivity
growth in the world economy in the years before 1800, and that was trans-
lated into a huge expansion of the world population. Modern economic
growth is the result of sheer scale.

Kremer adduces two kinds of evidence for his position. The first is based
on population growth rates for the world as a whole in the preindustrial era.
In the years before 1850, when population growth rates effectively index the
rate of efficiency advance, there is a strong positive correlation between the
size of world population and the implied rate of efficiency advance, as shown
in figure 11.7.

The second evidence Kremer brings forward is population densities circa
1500 across the major continents, which had been isolated from each other for
millennia: Eurasia, the Americas, and Australia. Why was Eurasia so far ahead

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o  227


of the Americas, and even farther ahead of Australia, when contact was finally
established? Kremer argues that the large land mass of Eurasia allowed for a
much greater population at any level of technology. This greater population
created more rapid technological growth rates in Eurasia.29

There is clearly a core of sense to the idea that increased population size,
the product of past technological change in the preindustrial era, increased the
rate of technological advance. But it is also clear that world population alone
cannot explain the acceleration in efficiency growth rates after 1800 seen in
figure 11.7.

Under Kremer’s argument, the growth rate of ideas would be at best just
proportionate to population size. This would occur where there is no rivalry
in the production of ideas. That is, the more people there are, proportion-
ately the more ideas there are. More realistically a larger population would
produce many simultaneous introductions of the same ideas, so that idea pro-
duction would expand less rapidly than population. To obtain a growth rate
of ideas proportionate to population, idea production must also be propor-
tional to the existing stock of ideas. Each idea opens the way for possible ex-
tensions: the more we know, the more easily we can add further to our stock
of knowledge.30

With the two assumptions above we can take the world population ob-
servations from before 1800 and plot the relationship between the population
size and efficiency growth rates. This is shown as the dotted line in figure 11.7.
When we use this line to predict the expected rate of efficiency growth for
fifty-year periods after 1800 we see that the actual efficiency growth rates in-
creasingly deviate from the predicted rates.

The lack of fit seen here is going to be a problem with any endogenous
growth theory of the Industrial Revolution: it is the Industrial Revolution’s
seemingly discontinuous nature. Oded Galor and Omer Moav, for example,
propose a theoretical model that combines the Kremer population mechanism
with endogenously changing household preferences for quality, as opposed to

29. Kremer, 1993b.

30. Formally we assume Δ A = hNA, where A, the level of efficiency now, is also an index
for the stock of ideas, Δ A is the addition to the stock of ideas in any year, N is the 
population
level, and h is just a constant. This implies that the growth rate of ideas, which is also the
growth rate of efficiency, is

g = —Δ A– = hN.

A  A

228  chat R  


quantity, of children. They do not, however, show that this model produces
such a discontinuity.31

Challenges Ahead

There are many competing theories of the great break in human history that
is the Industrial Revolution. Each is problematic for its own reasons, and none
looks particularly plausible on its face. The next chapter considers the details
of the Industrial Revolution, and whether they can be reconciled with any
particular theory of the event.

31. Galor and Moav, 2002.

th  U zzl o th  USTR al R  v olUT o  229


2  The Industrial Revolution in England

In the eighty years or so after 1780 the population of Britain nearly tripled, the
towns of Liverpool and Manchester became gigantic cities, the average income of
the population more than doubled, the share of farming fell from just under half
to just under one-fifth of the nation’s output, and the making of textiles and iron
moved into the steam-driven factories. So strange were these events that before
they happened they were not anticipated, and while they were happening they
were not comprehended.          —Donald McCloskey (1981)1

The Industrial Revolution in England—the seemingly abrupt escape of this
tiny island nation, within less than a generation, from millennia of pitifully
slow economic progress—is one of history’s great mysteries. Its apparent
suddenness, in a society that was (and still is) noted for the evolutionary
nature  of all social change, poses a baffling challenge to those who would
supply an economic explanation.

In one of the more delicious ironies of history the Industrial Revolution
was precisely coupled with that other model of human liberation, the French
Revolution. But the political revolutionaries who proclaimed their love for all
humanity in 1789 were soon awash in the blood of an ever-expanding list of
enemies. As the revolutionaries fed on each other, revolutionary equality soon
yielded to a vainglorious military dictatorship that led hundreds of thousands
to their starving, frozen end on the Russian steppes. Meanwhile a “nation of
shopkeepers,” incapable it seemed of vision beyond their next beef pudding,
was transforming the possibilities for all humanity. And in the process, as we
shall see, they ushered in more egalitarian societies than had been witnessed
for thousands of years.

The events of the Industrial Revolution, thanks to two hundred years of
historical inquiry, are widely known and reasonably well agreed upon. But
their interpretation remains hotly contested, with no two scholars agreeing on
what caused the Industrial Revolution and on what its wider significance is.

1. McCloskey, 1981, 103.

230


Here, after briefly detailing the major events of the Industrial Revolu-
tion, I argue that, contrary to appearances, the Industrial Revolution actually
stretched back hundreds of years to its origin, and that it was a gradual and
evolutionary development that affected other European economies almost as
much   as England. It was the product of the gradual progress of settled agrar-
ian societies toward a more rational, economically oriented mindset, mani-
fested in the many dimensions discussed in chapter 9.

While there is no doubt that a revolutionary change took place at some
point, between preindustrial society with its 0 percent productivity growth
rate and modern society with productivity growth rates exceeding 1 percent
per year, the precise date of that transition is hard to identify, and it may re-
main forever indeterminate.

In particular, individual personalities and events, so beloved of narrative
historians, do not matter. World history would have not changed in any sig-
nificant respect had the future Sir Richard Arkwright—the sometime Bolton
hairdresser, wigmaker, and pub owner who introduced mechanized factory
spinning in 1768—instead opened a fish shop. We would not still be sitting
in  the Malthusian era had James Watt, inventor of separate condensers for
steam engines in 1769, instead found God and trained for the ministry.

The appearance of a sudden shock to the economic system was created
instead by accidents and contingencies. In particular the enormous population
growth in England after 1760, Britain’s military successes in the Revolutionary
and Napoleonic wars, and the development of the United States all contributed
to the appearance of an abrupt departure, as opposed to the continuation of
more gradual changes.

The Details of the Industrial Revolution

The Industrial Revolution is unique in world history owing to the sudden ap-
pearance of a more rapid rate of efficiency advance than had been witnessed
over sustained periods by any earlier economy.

The efficiency of any competitive economy, or indeed of any sector
within the economy, can be estimated simply as the ratio of the average cost
of the production inputs—capital, labor, and land—per unit to the average
output price per unit. That is,


Average cost of a unit of inputs

A = —————————————.

Average price of a unit of output

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A  

23


100

80

60

40

20

0

1700    1720    1740    1760    1780    1800    1820    1840    1860

Figure 2. Production efficiency in England by decade, 1700–1869.

More efficient economies produce more output per unit of input. Since the
value of payments to inputs has to equal the value of outputs, in more effi-
cient economies output prices are low relative to input prices. The exact de-
tails of this computation are given in the technical appendix, but the concept
itself is simple.

Thanks to the unique stability of England from at least 1200 onward,
records of wages, prices, population, rents, and returns of capital can be con-
structed throughout these years, allowing us to estimate the efficiency of the
English economy as far back as 1200.

Figure 12.1 shows production efficiency calculated in this way for the in-
terval 1700–1869. In the immediate run-up to the Industrial Revolution in
the eighteenth century there is no sign of any sustained efficiency growth.
The English economy of the eighteenth century looks as Malthusian as any
that came before. Then, around 1790, the steady, inexorable upward march of
efficiency that characterizes the modern age first appears. From the 1780s to
the 1860s the efficiency growth rate was still only 0.5 percent per year, less
than half the typical modern rate. But this was nevertheless a period of un-
precedented, sustained advance in efficiency.

The immediate sources of the productivity advance after 1790 are well
understood. Table 12.1 shows the overall productivity growth rate from the

232  chat R 2 


Table 2.

Sources of the Industrial Revolution, 1760s–1860s

Efficiency   Share of   Contribution to national
growth rate   national    efficiency growth rate

Sector           (%)      income         (%)

All textiles          —       0.11          0.24

Cottons         2.4      0.06          0.18

Woolens         1.1      0.04          0.05

Iron and steel        1.4      0.01         0.02

Coal mining        0.2      0.02          0.00

Transport          1.2      0.08         0.09

Agriculture         0.3      0.30          0.07

Identified advance      —       0.51          0.42

Whole economy       —       1.00          0.40

1760s to the 1860s, as well as the contributions from the major sectors with
known innovations. As noted, a nice property of the aggregate productivity
growth rate is that it is just the sum of productivity growth rates in each sec-
tor weighted by the share of the value of output in that sector in the national
value of output (see the technical appendix).

As the last column of the table shows, productivity advance in textiles
accounted for more than half of all productivity advance for the hundred
years  of the Industrial Revolution. A small additional contribution came
from coal and iron, but the other major contributing sectors were trans-
port and agriculture. Transport because there was rapid productivity ad-
vance in that sector. Agriculture because, even though productivity advance
was slow, the size of the sector allowed it to make a significant national
contribution.

Textiles were the flagship industry of the Industrial Revolution. Effi-
ciency in converting raw cotton into cloth increased fourteenfold from the
1760s to the 1860s, a growth rate of 2.4 percent per year, faster than produc-
tivity growth rates in most modern economies. In the 1860s the output of the
economy was about 27 percent higher than it would otherwise have been,
due solely to textile innovations—a gain in income equivalent to £169 million
a year.

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    233


Figure 2.2 A water frame from Richard Arkwright’s Cromford Mill, 1785.

While it took the equivalent of 18 man-hours to transform a pound of
cotton into cloth in the 1760s, by the 1860s this was done in the equivalent
of 1.5 man-hours. The cause of this gain is also clear. Beginning in the 1760s,
a stream of technological innovations in textiles—some famous but most of
them anonymous—transformed the industry. The machines that allowed this
gain were still surprisingly simple in their construction, as figure 12.2 (show-
ing the Arkwright water frame) demonstrates.

Institutionalists assert that an increased rate of innovation must stem from
greater inducements offered by the economy to innovators. Yet the textile in-
novators of the Industrial Revolution, even those who were successful and are
now famous, typically earned small returns.

234  chat R 2 


Table 2.2

Revolution

Gains from Innovation in the Textile Sector during the Industrial

Innovator      Device         Result

John Kay      Flying shuttle, 1733   Impoverished by litigation to

enforce patent. House destroyed by
machine breakers in 1753. Died in
poverty in France.

James Hargreaves  Spinning jenny, 1769  Patent denied. Forced to flee by

machine breakers in 1768. Died in
workhouse in 1777.

Richard Arkwright  Water frame, 1769   Worth £0.5 million at death in

1792. Most of his fortune was
made after 1781, when other
manufacturers stopped honoring
his  patents.

Samuel Crompton  Mule, 1779       No attempt to patent invention.

Granted £500 by manufacturers in
the 1790s. Granted £5,000 by Par-
liament in 1811.

Reverend Edmund  Power loom, 1785    Patent worthless. Factory burned by
Cartwright                 machine breakers in 1790. Granted

£10,000 by Parliament in 1809.

Eli Whitney    Cotton gin, 1793    Patent worthless. Made money later
(United States)              as a government arms contractor.

Richard Roberts  Self-acting mule, 1830  Patent revenues barely covered de-

velopment costs. Died in poverty in
1864.

Source: Usher, 1929, 249–69.

Table 12.2 lists the financial gains of the most famous innovators in the
textile industries during the Industrial Revolution. These men—the few who
succeeded where many others had tried and failed, who helped revolutionize
textiles—typically benefited little from their endeavors. Even in Industrial Rev-
olution England the market was just not very good at rewarding innovation.
The profit rates of major firms in the industry also provide evidence that
most of the innovations quickly leaked from the innovators to other producers,
with little reward to the originators. The cotton spinners Samuel Greg and

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    235


Partners earned average profits of 12 percent from 1796 to 1819. This was a
normal return for a commercial venture of the time. Similarly William Grey
and Partners made less than 2 percent per year from 1801 to 1810—a negative
profit rate. If innovative firms could have guarded their discoveries, through
secrecy or enforceable patents, they would have reaped large profits compared
to their competitors. Instead innovations in cotton spinning mainly reduced
prices, benefiting consumers. Thus Richard Hornby and Partners, operating
in the weaving sector (which was not mechanized until the 1810s), posted an
average profit of 11 percent during the interval 1777–1809. This was as high as
the profit of Greg and Partners, operating in the innovating sector.2

Further evidence of the meager rewards to innovation in the textile in-
dustry during the Industrial Revolution comes from the wills of the rich in
the nineteenth century. Only a handful of textile innovators, such as Richard
Arkwright and Robert Peel, became wealthy. Of the 379 people who died in
the  1860s in Britain leaving estates of more than £0.5 million, only 17 (4 per-
cent) were in textiles.3 Yet the industry produced 11 percent of Britain’s na-
tional output and was responsible for the majority of the efficiency advance
during the Industrial Revolution. The economy of the period was still spec-
tacularly bad at rewarding innovation. Wage earners and foreign customers,
not entrepreneurs, were the overwhelming beneficiaries of innovation. This
is why Britain has few foundations to rival the great private philanthropies
and universities of the United States. The Industrial Revolution did not make
paupers into princes.

A similar tale can be told for the other great nexuses of innovation in
Industrial Revolution England: coal mining, iron and steel, and railroads.
English coal output, for example, exploded during the Industrial Revolution.
Figure 12.3 shows that output by the 1860s was nearly twenty times as great as
in the 1700s. This coal heated homes, made ore into iron, and powered rail-
way locomotives. Yet there were no equivalents of the great fortunes made in
oil, railways, and steel in America’s late-nineteenth-century industrialization.
The new industrial priesthood, the engineers who developed the English
coalfields, railways, and canals, made prosperous but typically moderate liv-
ings. Though their names survive to history—Richard Trevithick, George
and Robert Stephenson, Humphry Davy—they too captured very few of the

2. Harley, 1998. The risk-free return on capital in these years was 5 percent or above.

3. Rubinstein, 1981, 60–67.

236  chat R 2 


30


1700s

20

1780s

1820s

1860s

10

0

0              20              40              60

Annual output (millions of tons)

Figure 2.3 Coal output and real prices, 1700s–1860s. Data from Clark and Jacks, 2007.

social rewards their enterprise wrought. Richard Trevithick, the pioneer of
locomotives, died a pauper in 1833. George Stephenson—whose famous lo-
comotive The Rocket ran loaded at 15 miles an hour in a trial in 1829, an un-
precedented speed for land travel in this era—did much better. Yet his
country house in Chesterfield was but a small reward for his substantial con-
tributions to railway engineering. Other locomotives competed in the famous
trial, and soon a swarm of locomotive builders were supplying the expanding
railway network.

As figure 12.3 illustrates, innovation in the Industrial Revolution era typ-
ically benefited mainly consumers in the form of lower prices. As coal output
exploded, real prices to consumers steadily declined: the real price in the
1700s was 60 percent greater than that in the 1860s. Coal, iron and steel,
and rail carriage all remained highly competitive in England during the In-
dustrial Revolution. The patent system offered little protection to most of the
innovations in these sectors, and they quickly leaked from one producer to
another.

The increased rate of innovation in Industrial Revolution England was
the result not of unusual rewards but of a greater supply of innovation, still
modestly rewarded. Figure 11.5 illustrated two ways in which innovation rates

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    237


might increase. The institutionalist perspective is that the rewards offered by
the market shifted upward compared to those in all previous preindustrial
economies. There is no evidence of any such change. The last significant re-
form   of the patent system was in 1689, more than a hundred years before effi-
ciency gains became common. And the patent system itself played little role
for most innovation in Industrial Revolution England.

Instead the upsurge in innovation in the Industrial Revolution, in terms
of figure 11.5, reflected a surge in supply. With the benefits to innovation no
greater than in earlier economies, the supply of them nevertheless rose sub-
stantially. Facing the same challenges and incentives as in other economies,
British producers were more likely to attempt novel methods of production.
The experience of agriculture supports the idea that the Industrial Revo-
lution represented mainly a change in the supply of innovation rather than
improved incentives. Historians have long written of an agricultural revolu-
tion accompanying the Industrial Revolution. Indeed generations of English
schoolchildren have read, probably with bored bemusement, of the exploits
of    such supposedly heroic innovators as Jethro Tull (author in 1733 of An Es-
say on Horse-Hoeing Husbandry), “Turnip” Townsend, and Arthur Young. But
this agricultural revolution is a myth, created by historians who vastly over-
estimated the gains in output from English agriculture in these years.4 The
productivity growth rate in agriculture was instead modest, at 0.27 percent
per   year, lower than for the economy as a whole. But even these modest gains
represented considerably faster productivity growth than had been typical
over   the years 1200–1800. Figure 12.4, for example, shows wheat yields per
seed sown in England from 1211 to 1453. Medieval agriculture seems to have

been totally static over hundreds of years.

Yet the agricultural improvements of the Industrial Revolution had no
discernible connection to events in industry. Mechanization remained mini-
mal in English agriculture even by 1860, the only substantially mechanized task
being grain threshing. Similarly, the insistence of the school curriculum not-
withstanding, there were no heroic innovators, as in textiles and steam—no
Hargreaves, Cromptons, Watts, or Stephensons—just an amorphous collec-

4. These output estimates were based on the food needs of a growing and also wealthier
population. But they did not take into account the way coal and imported raw materials sub-
stituted  for the former agricultural production of energy and raw materials, allowing English
agriculture to feed more people with little additional total output.

238  chat R 2 


2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

1200       1250       1300       1350       1400       1450

Figure 2.4 Wheat yields in England, 1211–1453. The boxes show annual yields, and the solid

line a twenty-one-year moving average of these annual yields. Data from Clark, 2001a.

tion of anonymous sons of the soil, somehow bringing home more bacon. All
subsequent accounts have been of incremental changes, carried out by a broad
swath of farmers across a long sweep of time.5

Thousands of individual cultivators in Industrial Revolution England
somehow learned incrementally better methods from their neighbors or from
their own observations. They did this despite the fact that their medieval
cousins, with the same incentives, were unable to progress.

When Was the Industrial Revolution?

The discussion above suggests that the transition between the static Mathusian
economy, which lasted at least a hundred thousand years, and the modern
economy can be dated to 1760–1800. But that appearance of a definitive break
between the two regimes, in the blink of an eye in terms of human history, is
mistaken. Instead a whole series of contingencies conspired to make the break
seem much more definitive and sudden than it was.

5. See, for example, Overton, 1996, 4.

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    239


300

250

200

150

100                                         1600-1760

trend

50                          1760-1869 trend

0

1200    1300    1400    1500    1600    1700    1800    1900    2000

Figure 2.5 Long-run efficiency of the English economy, 1250–2000.

The first sign that the transition date is more ambiguous than the tradi-
tional histories suggest comes from an examination of the efficiency of the
English economy all the way back to 1246. The efficiency measured here is the
efficiency at producing income, whether the goods consumed came from
England or abroad.6 With the enormous rise in overseas trade in these years,
and with that trade often involving territories ruled by British settlers and
overlords, the boundary of the “English economy” becomes increasingly ill
defined. Figure 12.5 shows the efficiency of the English economy on this
basis from 1250 to 2000 as a ten-year moving average.

Overall the dramatic transition from the preindustrial to the modern
world is clear. But the acceleration of efficiency growth during the Industrial
Revolution, around 1800, is not so evident from this longer perspective. It
is    also clear that England experienced steady, but not spectacular, efficiency
growth in the 160 years preceding 1760. The annual rate of 0.2 percent per
year was slow by modern standards. But the slow growth of the interval 1600–
1760 was still enough to increase the measured efficiency of the English econ-
omy 37 percent over these years, a much more rapid pace of advance than was

6. In contrast table 12.1 refers to the growth rates of efficiency of production of goods
within England, which was faster since much of the textile output was exported.

240  chat R 2 


100

Interregnum

80

60

40


20     Civil War

Glorious Revolution

0

1600    1620    1640    1660    1680    1700    1720    1740    1760


Figure 2.6

1600–1760.

Efficiency of the English economy during the approach to the Industrial Revolution,

generally seen in the Malthusian era. Indeed had this growth continued from
1760 without the hiatus witnessed in the last decades of the eighteenth cen-
tury, the efficiency of the economy in the 1860s would have been at 95 per-
cent of the level achieved after the Industrial Revolution.

The efficiency of production of income increased only 0.33 percent per
year from 1760 to 1869, a rate fast by the standards of the Malthusian era but
still slow by modern benchmarks. So one way the Industrial Revolution could
be interpreted is as one phase within a general transition, from Malthusian
stasis to modern growth, that the English economy began around 1600. It was
not an abrupt start, but a continuation and acceleration of a process that,
with ups and downs, has brought us to the present.

If growth really did begin in the early seventeenth century, then simple
institutionalist explanations of the Industrial Revolution, which have focused
on the arrival of modern democracy in England with the Glorious Revolution
in 1688–89, look decidedly unpromising. Figure 12.6 shows the efficiency of
the English economy in close-up view, by year from 1600 to 1760 and as a ten-
year moving average. None of the political events—the Civil War of 1642–48,
the reign of Parliament and Cromwell during the failed Interregnum, the
restoration of the monarchy in 1660, or the Glorious Revolution of 1688–89—

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    24


makes any apparent difference to the slow upward movement of economic
efficiency. Harvest successes and failures, which account for most of the
short-term fluctuations, have much more impact than political events. And
the   rise of efficiency clearly started in the seventeenth century, before the
great institutional change cited by Douglass North and his followers, the Glo-
rious Revolution.

But figure 12.5 also reveals that before 1600 there were mysterious swings
up and down in the measured efficiency of the English economy. Around
1450, at its late medieval maximum, the measured efficiency of the economy
was within 88 percent of its level in the 1860s. Around 1300, at its minimum,
it was only at 55 percent of the level in the 1860s. This suggests the possibility
that the efficiency growth witnessed in the years 1600–1800 was really just a
catch-up to the average medieval efficiency level, and that 1800 does represent
the true beginnings of a break from the medieval regime. Without further in-
formation there is no way to tell.

Why Did the Industrial Revolution Appear so Dramatic?

The efficiency growth rates cited above suggest that a muted, gradual transi-
tion between the Malthusian and modern economies took place in England
around 1800. Rapid productivity growth rates fully equal to those of modern
economies did not appear until the late nineteenth century.

Why then did the Industrial Revolution appear so dramatic to contem-
poraries and to later observers? Why did nonfarm output increase almost
ninefold between the 1730s and the 1860s? Why the new giant cities where be-
fore there had been only villages and fields, the transformation of the country-
side through the enclosure of common lands, the building of a dense network
of twenty thousand miles of new turnpike roads? Why the mining of vast
quantities of coal—coal output was eighteen times greater in the 1860s than
in   the 1730s—with the scarring of the landscape by coal waste tips?

Why finally the ascendance of this minor country on the northwestern
corner of Europe—which in 1700 had a population less than one-third that
of France and about 4 percent that of both China and India—to the position
of world dominance it achieved by 1850, if not for dramatic gains from the
Industrial Revolution?

The answer proposed here is that the appearance of dramatic discontinuity
in the Industrial Revolution comes from the coincidence of faster productivity

242  chat R 2 


growth in England with an unexpected and unrelated explosion in English
population in the years 1750–1870. Britain’s rise to world dominance was thus
a product more of the bedroom labors of British workers than of their factory
toil. English population rose from six million in the 1740s, no more than its
medieval maximum in the 1300s, to twenty million in the 1860s, more than
tripling. Other countries in Europe experienced far more restricted population
gains. The French, for example, increased during the same interval only from
twenty-one million to thirty-seven million. In addition the westward expansion
of the United States was steadily adding more acres of farm output to the world
economy. Thus England went from a country whose land area per person was
similar to that of its trading partners in the 1760s to one that had significantly
less land per person than all its trading partners by the 1860s (see table 12.6).

The population explosion seems completely unrelated to the productivity
gains in textiles, steam, iron, and agriculture that characterized the Industrial
Revolution. For a start, the growth in population was well under way before
there  were significant productivity gains in any sector. By the 1790s popula-
tion was already 37 percent higher than in the 1740s. That was why Malthus,
writing in the 1790s, saw only a problem of excess population, not one of
population growth driven by economic changes. Since mortality declined
little   in the era of the Industrial Revolution, most of the increase in popula-
tion came from fertility increases.

Chapter 4 showed how the birth rate was restrained in preindustrial
England by women marrying late, by large numbers of women never marry-
ing, and by women remaining celibate outside marriage. Even though fertil-
ity was unrestricted within marriage, this marriage pattern, at its extreme
around 1650, avoided half of all possible conceptions.

In the early eighteenth century the age of first marriage for women began
to decline. Figure 12.7 reveals that this drop began in the 1720s. This decline
in age of first marriage was enough on its own to raise the birth rate by a fifth
by 1800. At the same time as women married younger, more of them married.
In 1650 a fifth of women never married. By the early eighteenth century the
proportion of lifetime unmarried women had fallen to 10 percent, and the rate
remained at this lower level through the Industrial Revolution. The greater
frequency of marriage added another 12 percent to fertility. Finally, though
fewer women were at risk for this outcome, illegitimate births increased, adding
another 5 percent to overall fertility. Multiplying these factors we obtain an
increase in fertility between 1650 and 1800 of 40 percent. Thus while in 1650

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    243


30

28

Men

26

24

Women

22

20

1600        1650        1700        1750        1800


Figure 2.7

1997, 134.

Age of first marriage by decade, bachelor-spinster marriages. Data from Wrigley et al.,

the net reproduction rate was only 1.93 children per woman and population
was declining, by 1800 it was 2.68 and population was growing rapidly.

The sources of these changes in nuptiality do not seem to be economic.
They occurred in both the north and the south of England even though the
north was significantly transformed by the Industrial Revolution and the south
was largely unaffected. They occurred in parishes where employment was pre-
dominantly in agriculture as well as in parishes mainly engaged in trade, hand-
icrafts, and manufacturing, as table 12.3 shows. The only feature of this period
that might explain earlier and more frequent marriage is the decline of mater-
nal deaths from childbirth. Table 12.4 shows that in the seventeenth century 1.5
percent of pregnancies ended with the death of the mother.7 A woman marry-
ing  at 25, who gave birth to the average of number of children for such a mar-
riage, 5.6, would have a 9 percent chance of dying in pregnancy. The last col-
umn of the table shows the risk of death from pregnancy that a woman who
married at age 20 would face in each half century. These were very high risks.
By 1800 the mortality risk from pregnancy had dropped by two-thirds, even

7. The chance of dying as a result of the complications of pregnancy in England is now
less than 0.006 percent per birth.

244  chat R 2 


Table 2.3

Women’s Average Age of First Marriage by Parish Type

Retail and

Agricultural   handicraft    Manufacturing    Mixed
parishes     parishes     parishes     parishes

Period       (8)        (5)         (3)        (10)

1700–49      25.2       26.5        26.6       26.3

1750–99      24.3       24.8        24.6       24.7

1800–37      23.7       24.0        23.4       23.7

Source: Wrigley et al., 1997, 187.

Note: Numbers of parishes in parentheses.


Table 2.4

Deaths from Pregnancy

Pregnancies                Deaths from

resulting in      Female     pregnancy of women
death of mother    mean age of    marrying at age 20

Period         (%)        marriage         (%)

Pre-1600       1.23         —           —

1600–49       1.34         25.4           9.7

1650–99       1.63         25.9          11.3

1700–49       1.28         25.7           9.0

1750–99       0.92         24.4           7.1

1800–37       0.55         23.5           4.3

Source: Wrigley et al., 1997, 134, 313, 399.

Note: The percentage of mothers dying from childbirth complications is calculated assuming
that these were the only risks of mortality for married women. Deaths from other causes at
ages 20–49 Would reduce this percentage.

though there was little decline in overall mortality. Women would be well aware
of the mortality risks of marriage. The high level of these risks in the seventeenth
century might thus explain both delaying marriage, as a way of reducing these
risks, and also the decision by many women to eschew marriage altogether.

The limited efficiency gains of the Industrial Revolution, detailed above,
mean that population growth was more important than efficiency growth in
driving up the output of the English economy. Figure 12.8 shows the rise
of total income in England between 1700 and 1860 compared to the rise in
population and the gain in income per person. While the total output of the

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    245


600

500                                   Total income

400

300

Population

200

100                                   Income per person

0

1700    1720    1740    1760    1780    1800    1820    1840    1860

Figure 2.8 Population and economic growth in England, 1700s–1860s.

English economy was nearly six times as large by the 1860s, population
growth alone explains most of this gain.

Furthermore, the gain in population was even more important to the rel-
ative size of the English economy than to its absolute size. The productivity
gains during the Industrial Revolution had almost as much effect on the in-
comes of England’s competitors in Europe as on England itself, for two rea-
sons. The first was direct exports of cheaper textiles, iron, and coal by England
to other countries. The second was the establishment in these countries of
new manufacturing enterprises that exploited the innovative technologies of
the Industrial Revolution.

Thus Ireland—a country which became more agricultural and indeed
deindustrialized in response to the English Industrial Revolution—seems to
have experienced as much income gain as its trading partner England. Real
wages for Irish building workers rose as much as those in England in the years
1785–1869, as figure 12.9 shows. The figure reveals that these wage gains oc-
curred before the Irish potato famine of 1845 led to substantial population
losses and outmigration. Indeed between 1767 and 1845 it is estimated that the
population of Ireland rose proportionately as much as that of England.

246  chat R 2 


120

100

80

Ireland

60


England

40

Potato famine

20

0

1760       1780       1800       1820       1840       1860


Figure 2.9

Clark, 2005.

English and Irish real wages, 1785–1869. Data from Geary and Stark, 2004, and

Similarly there is little sign that England was gaining significant income
per person relative to the Netherlands in the Industrial Revolution era. Fig-
ure 12.10 shows income per person in England by decade from the 1800s to
1910–13, taking Dutch income per person in 1910–13 as 82 percent of English
income. Between the 1800s and the 1860s England, the white-hot center of the
Industrial Revolution, saw income per person increase by 44 percent. In that
same interval the Netherlands, a peripheral player making few or no indepen-
dent contributions to industrial innovations during the period, saw income per
person rise by 29 percent. England gained 11 percent on the Dutch in terms of
income per person during the Industrial Revolution. This was trivial compared
to  the 64 percent gain in English total income relative to that of the Dutch
from the 1760s to the 1860s as a result of faster English population growth.

The English population boom, the rise of real incomes during the In-
dustrial Revolution, the limited land area of England, and the limited pro-
ductivity gains in English farming all meant that domestic agriculture could
not meet the food and raw material demands of the English economy. As
table 12.5 shows, while population more than tripled in the course of the In-
dustrial Revolution, domestic agricultural output did not even double. By the

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    247


180

150                               England

120

Netherlands

90

60

30

0

1800      1820      1840      1860      1880      1900      1920

Figure 2. Real income per person, England and the Netherlands, 1800s to 1910–13. The es-

timate of English income per person until 1869 is continued to 1913 using an index of U.K. GDP
per person from Feinstein, 1972, table T21. Dutch income per person from 1805 to 1913 is from
Smits et al., 2000.

1860s England had gone from a country in which food and raw material im-
ports were unimportant to one in which net food and raw material imports
were equivalent to 22 percent of GDP.

This trade of manufactures for food and raw materials was made on rel-
atively favorable terms because of the addition of substantial new territory to
the north Atlantic trading area with the westward expansion of the United
States. Table 12.6 shows the vast amount of farm acreage added to the United
States by the 1860s.

The food and raw material imports of the Industrial Revolution had to be
paid for by exports of manufactured goods. It was this, rather than technolog-
ical advances, that made Britain “the workshop of the world.” Had English
population remained at six million into the 1860s, the country’s domestic agri-
cultural sector would have been able to feed and provide raw materials for the
English population. The net exports of manufactures, which by the 1860s con-
stituted nearly 20 percent of GDP, would have been close to zero. Thus with-
out population growth nonfarm output in the 1860s, instead of being nearly
ten times its level in the 1730s, would have been only double the earlier level.

248  chat R 2 


Table 2.5

Population Growth and Food and Raw Material Supplies

1700–09  1760–69  1860–69

Population (millions)              5.5      6.7     20.1

English farm net output (millions of £)     65      71      114

Net food imports (millions of £)         2       3      80

Net raw material imports (millions of £)    –2      –5      61

Domestic coal output (millions of £)       2       3      37

Nonfarm food and raw material supplies     2      2      178

(millions of £)

All food and raw materials per person (£)    12      11      15

Sources: Farm output: Clark, 2002b. Imports: Parliamentary Papers, 1870; Schumpeter, 1960.
Exports: Schumpeter, 1960; Mitchell, 1988, 221–22. Coal output: Clark and Jacks, 2007.

Note: £ of 1860–69.

The unusual growth of population during the Industrial Revolution in
England, and the simultaneous expansion of the cultivated area in the United
States, were more important than the specific technological advances of these
years for the transformation of the economy and the society.

How Gradual Was the Transition to Modern Growth Rates?

Figure 12.5 suggests that the date of the transition between the preindustrial
world of almost no efficiency growth and the modern world of constant effi-
ciency advance is impossible to determine from aggregate productivity levels.
But the figure does reinforce the idea that the preindustrial world, at least as
represented by England, was largely one of technological stasis.

The measured aggregate productivity level of the economy was as high in
the thirteenth century as in the eighteenth century. This finding does not
mesh with intellectual and social history, where we see in Europe, from the
Middle Ages onward, a slow but steady diet of innovations in technology, sci-
ence, architecture, and the arts. Table 12.7 offers a brief timeline of significant
innovations in Europe between 1120 and 1670. Clearly this was not a world in
which nothing was happening. The puzzle is that these developments had so
little impact on production technologies.

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    249


Table 2.6 Farmland and Population in England Relative to


Europe and the United States

England

1800–09    1860–69

Population (millions)         9.2       21

Farm area (millions of acres)      26       26

Acres per person            2.8       1.2

Western Europe

Population (millions)        103       152

Farm area (millions of acres)     317a        317a

Acres per person            3.1       2.1

Russia

Population (millions)         53       74

Farm area (millions of acres)     702a        702a

Acres per person           13.2       9.5

United States

Population (millions)         6.2       35

Farm area (millions of acres)      —       407

Acres per person           —       11.6

Sources: FAO, statistics database; Mitchell, 1998a. aBased on modern areas
from the Food and Agriculture Organization.

Note: Western Europe includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.

However, the aggregate productivity measure reported in figure 12.5 is
not the simple sum of productivity advances in the production of individual
goods. It is the sum weighted by the share of expenditures on each good. As
explained in chapter 7 economists use this weighting because it measures how
much technical changes mattered to the average consumer.

But if we are concerned with measuring the average rate of innovation in
a society this is not necessarily the best index to use. Significant innovations
may have an effect on the mass of people only long after they first appear.
At the time an innovation actually occurs, people may not, because of their
income or circumstances, employ it to any great extent. A classic example
of such a delayed effect is the introduction of the printing press in Europe in

250  chat R 2 


Table 2.7 Innovations in Europe, 1120–1665

Date       Innovation            Location (person)

1120      Gothic architecture        France, England

ca. 1200     Windmill             Northern Europe

1275       Gunpowder            Germany

ca. 1285     Mechanical clock         Northern Europe

ca. 1315     The Divine Comedy        Italy (Dante)

ca. 1325     Cannon             Northern Europe

ca. 1330     Crown glass            France

ca. 1350     Spectacles            Venice

ca. 1350     The Decameron          Italy (Boccaccio)

ca. 1390     Canterbury Tales         England (Chaucer)

ca. 1400     Harpsichord           Flanders

1413      Perspective in painting       Italy (Brunelleschi)

ca. 1450     Printing press           Germany (Gutenberg)

ca. 1450     Quadrant (navigation)       —

ca. 1450     Arabic numerals          —

ca. 1475     Musket              Italy, Germany
1492       Discovery of the Americas     Spain (Columbus)
1498       Sea route to India         Portugal (da Gama)

1512      European postal service      Germany (Franz von Taxis)
1522      World circumnavigation     Spain (Magellan)

1532       Potato              Spain

1544       Tomato             Italy

ca. 1587     Tamburlaine the Great      England (Marlowe)
1589      Knitting frame         England (Lee)

1597       Opera (Dafne)          Italy (Peri)

1600       Electricity             England (Gilbert)

1602       Hamlet              England (Shakespeare)

1608       Telescope             The Netherlands (Lipperhey)

1614       Logarithms            Scotland (Napier)

c. 1650     Mechanized silk spinning     Italy
1654      Modern thermometer       Italy

1656       Pendulum clock          The Netherlands (Huygens)

1665       Microscope            England (Hooke)


1452 by Johannes Gutenberg. Prior to that innovation books had to be copied
by hand, with copyists on works with just plain text still only able to copy
3,000 words per day. Producing one copy of the Bible at this rate would take
136 man-days. A 250-page book in modern octavo size would take about 37
man-days. In addition the imprecision of handwriting meant that the print
had   to be of larger size, demanding about twice the area per word on the page
as in modern typeset books and thus driving up the cost of materials and
binding.8

Figure 12.11 shows the estimated productivity level in book production by
decade from the 1470s to the 1860s, calculated as the ratio between the wage
of building craftsmen and the price of a book of standard characteristics.9 The
rate of productivity growth from the 1460s to the 1560s was 2.3 percent per
year, as fast as that for cotton textiles in the Industrial Revolution. In the next
hundred years productivity grew more slowly, at only 0.6 percent per year.
But this was still faster than the rate seen in most of the economy during the
Industrial Revolution. From the 1660s to the 1860s there were apparently few
further productivity gains in printing. But all this increase in the efficiency of
book production had no appreciable impact on the measured efficiency of the
economy before the 1660s, since books were such a tiny share of expenditures
for most of the preindustrial era. In the first decade of the sixteenth century
the average annual output of books was about twenty thousand volumes,
about 0.02 percent of English national income. By the 1550s this had risen to
a hundred thousand volumes, but because of the falling prices of books that
was still only 0.11 percent of national income.

Books were not the only goods that saw substantial efficiency advances in
the years before 1800 yet had little or no impact on the overall efficiency of
the economy because they represented such a small share of aggregate expen-
diture. Table 12.8 shows the price of nails by fifty-year periods, compared
with wages, and the implied efficiency in nail production. A pound of nails
in the early thirteenth century cost 3.3 pence, while a day’s wage for a crafts-
man was 2.4 pence. Thus a pound of nails cost more than a day’s wage. By the
years 1850-69 the day wage had increased about seventeenfold, to 40 pence

8. Clark and Levin, 2001.

9. With both hand production and the printing press the main cost in book production
was labor (paper and parchment production costs were mainly labor costs).

252  chat R 2 


25

20

15

10

5

0

1470    1520    1570    1620    1670    1720    1770    1820    1870

Figure 2. Productivity in book production in England, 1470s–1860s.

per day. But nail prices were only 3.2 pence per pound, so a craftsman could
buy more than 12 pounds of nails with his day’s wage.10

But most of the gain in efficiency in nail production was achieved before
the Industrial Revolution, so that the efficiency of production was nearly
seven times as great on the eve of the Industrial Revolution than it had been
in 1200. This improvement had little economic impact, since nails were al-
ways a small share of construction costs for buildings and furnishings. Other
goods whose prices relative to wages substantially improved before 1800 in-
cluded paper, glass, spectacles, clocks, musical instruments, paints, spices such
as pepper, sugar, fine textiles such as silks, tobacco, and gunpowder. And none
of these improvements had much impact on living costs simply because most
of these items were luxury goods consumed only by those with the highest in-
comes. The bulk of people’s expenditures were for the basics: food, clothing,
and shelter.

10. The near constancy of nail prices in nominal terms explains why in the United States
nails are still designated as twopenny nails or threepenny nails. These were the prices of a hun-
dred such nails in the fourteenth century in England. The terms became established as the
names of the particular types of nails since their prices changed so slowly.

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    253


Table 2.8

Productivity Growth in Nail Production, 1200–1869

Cost of nails   Day wage   Efficiency of  Efficiency growth

Period     (pence/lb)   (pence/day)   production   (percent per year)

1200–49      3.3       2.4       100        0.31

1250–99      2.9       2.4       117        0.09

1300–49      2.9       2.5       122       –0.35

1350–99      5.3       4.0       102        0.72

1400–49      4.3       4.6       147        0.34

1450–99      3.8       4.8       174        0.38

1500–49      3.3       5.0       211        0.39

1550–99      4.6       8.6       256        0.63

1600–49      4.6       12        351        0.67

1650–99      4.6       16        492        0.40

1700–49      4.2       18        603        0.21

1750–99      4.2       21        670        1.05

1800–49      4.5       36       1,132        0.81

1850–69      3.2      40       1,693        —

1200–1799                              0.38

Note: The efficiency growth rate for each period is calculated as average efficiency growth
between the beginning of the half century and the end. This is why efficiency growth in the
period 1300–49 is negative.

But let’s say we were to measure the rate of technological advance in
England from 1200 to 1869 by looking not at the consumption of the average
person, but at the consumption of people like us. Then we would have a very
different impression about the relative stasis of the economy before 1800. Fig-
ure 12.12 shows the real purchasing power of the average income in England
from the 1270s to the 1860s based on the shares of goods that people actually
bought. Though there was a doubling of real income between the medieval
period and the 1860s, almost all that gain came after 1800. In contrast the fig-
ure also shows the hypothetical purchasing power of that income were it to be
spent on goods in the manner of modern upper-class professionals—that is,
were it to be spent on books, clothing, glass, home furnishings, travel, spices,
sugar, and wine in the kind of proportions favored by this book’s author. The
purchasing power of income in terms of such a person rises much more, five-
fold, between the medieval period and the 1860s. But now there is much less

254  chat R 2 


120

100

Average person

80

60

40

20                 Consumer with modern tastes

0

1270      1370      1470      1570      1670      1770      1870


Figure 2.2

1270s–1860s.

Real purchasing power of the average income and hypothetical modern consumers,

discontinuity around 1800. Real purchasing power triples between the me-
dieval period and 1800. While the growth rate of real purchasing power for
such a consumer rose by 0.76 percent per year after 1800, from the 1480s to
the 1800s real purchasing power rose at 0.33 percent per year, far beyond the
average for the preindustrial world.

Thus the dynamism of the English economy in different periods seems to
depend crucially on the consumption interests of the observer. From the per-
spective of the lowest-paid workers, farm laborers, even by the end of the
Industrial Revolution they had not attained the living standards of the golden
years of the late Middle Ages. From the perspective of a modern American
with middle-class consumption habits, there was a world of change in con-
sumption possibilities even before 1800. These changes made it possible to
live in light-flooded houses, with painted or papered walls, and eat a wide
range of tasty foods from fine china and glassware. They made reading a daily
newspaper possible. They extended the length of the day by providing cheap
artificial illumination.

If innovation were an activity that followed an economic logic, if the
budget for innovative effort were devoted to producing the maximum value of
productivity advance per research dollar, then the aggregate efficiency standard

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    255


would be the most appropriate way of measuring the innovation rate of a so-
ciety. But if instead innovative activities were guided mainly by noneconomic
forces—curiosity, a love of novelty, a desire to impress others—then aggregate
efficiency growth might provide a very poor guide to the rate of innovation
in   a society, or to the relative innovativeness of societies. The evidence from
Industrial Revolution England suggests that, at least in early societies, the profit
motive is a relatively weak stimulus to innovation. Thus measuring the rate of
innovation using aggregate efficiency growth will not be appropriate.

The Switch to Inorganic Technologies

As Anthony Wrigley has emphasized, the Industrial Revolution represented
the beginnings of a switch from a largely organic system of production to the
increasingly inorganic systems of the modern world. The bulk of the food, en-
ergy,  and clothing and construction materials in the world before 1800 was
produced in the farm sector using organic methods. The classic Industrial
Revolution, with its reliance on coal and iron, was the first step toward an
economy that relied less and less on current sustained production through
plants and animals, and more on mining stores of energy and minerals.11

Organic production systems have three important features. The first is that
all outputs drawn from the system in the long run have to be balanced by
equivalent inputs. Every pound of nitrogen consumed off the farm in grain
products in preindustrial England had to be balanced by a pound of nitrogen
fixed from the air. This severely restrained potential output.12

The second feature is that, unlike inorganic systems in which the baseline
rate of productivity advance is zero, in organic systems without any innova-
tion efficiency growth is negative. Weeds and pathogens are constantly adapt-
ing, through the blind forces of natural selection, to reduce the productivity
of crops and animals. Indeed some modern grain crops, such as rye, are be-
lieved to have evolved within crops of barley and oats as crop weeds. Under the
harsher growing conditions of northern Europe rye proved to be more produc-
tive than the original grains, and it was eventually cultivated deliberately.13

11. Wrigley, 1990.

12. Clark, 1992.

13. Ghersa et al., 1994; Palumbi, 2001.

256  chat R 2 


The inherent tendency of productivity to decline in farming systems is
revealed most dramatically in such episodes as the Irish potato famine of 1845
and the Phylloxera attack on grape vines in Europe in the 1860s. Thus the
absence of measurable productivity growth in the farm system in England be-
fore the Industrial Revolution need not imply an absence of innovation. The
move from a 0 percent rate of productivity advance in the years before 1800
to a 0.3 percent rate of advance in 1800–60 may seem like an important phase
change. But suppose this instead represents, for example, a change from a rate
of innovation of 0.4 percent per year to one of 0.7 percent, being countered
by a constant natural degradation of technique of 0.4 percent per year. Then
the upward movement of innovation rates during the Industrial Revolution
would be less dramatic and would seem to be less of a change in regime.

The third feature of organic systems of production is that experiments to
devise better production methods are inherently difficult. In a cotton mill, for
example, controlled experiments in changing manufacturing methods can be
undertaken. Spindle speeds can be increased by 10 percent and the resulting
changes in production costs observed immediately. But in agriculture observ-
ing the effect of any change is difficult. The production period is longer,
and it may be years in the case of animals. Changes in the weather and in
pathogens impart huge shocks to output each year. Soil conditions vary from
field to field and even within fields, so a change that might be beneficial in
one environment could prove ineffective or damaging in another. Thus the
switch to more inorganic means of production may bias the seeming upturn
in innovation rates in favor of the modern era.

The Transition to the Modern World

The Industrial Revolution in England in 1760–1860 saw dramatic changes in
the English economy. But it is uncertain if we can identify the general switch
from economies with little innovation in production techniques to modern
economies, in which innovation is continuous, with the years 1760–1800.
The upturn in productivity growth rates was a drawn-out process. Aggregate
productivity growth rates are only one way of weighting the gains in effi-
ciency across the many production techniques in any society, and based on
other weightings the transition to modern growth rates would come sooner
than 1800. Furthermore, the assumption that the rate of efficiency growth

th  USTR al R  v olUT o   GL A    257


with no innovation in a society is zero is incorrect for preindustrial societies,
in which innovation was needed just to maintain the productivity of organic
production systems. Though the transition to the modern world was much
more drawn out than is popularly supposed, it was definitely accomplished in
Europe but not in Asia, despite Asia’s long reign as the most technologically
advanced area in the preindustrial world. In the next chapter we ask why this
was  so.

258  chat R 2 


3  Why England? Why Not China,
India, or Japan?

The people of this Island of Japan are good of nature, curteous above measure,
and valiant in war: their justice is severely executed without any partiality upon
transgressors of the law. They are governed in great civility. I mean, not a land
better governed in the world by civil policy.     —William Adams (1612)1

The previous chapter stresses that the suddenness of the Industrial Revolution
in England was more appearance than reality. The coincidence of major pop-
ulation growth and improved trade prospects with raw material producers
such as the United States made a modest acceleration of the rate of techno-
logical progress in England circa 1800 seem like an overnight transformation
of the economy. In fact England by 1850 was, technologically speaking, little
ahead of such competitors as the United States and the Netherlands.

Chapter 12 also emphasizes that the acceleration of advances in produc-
tivity came from the supply side. People responded differently to incentives
that had been in place for generations. That difference in response was a dy-
namic inherent in the institutionally stable private property regime of pre-
industrial England. The characteristics of the population were changing
through Darwinian selection. England found itself in the vanguard because of
its long, peaceful history stretching back to at least 1200 and probably long
before. Middle-class culture spread throughout the society through biological
mechanisms.

But all of these observations still beg several questions: Why did the same
conditions not lead to an Industrial Revolution at the same time, or even
earlier, in Japan, in the Yangzi Delta, or in Bengal? What was special about
Europe? Why did tiny England, with a population of around 6 million in
1760, achieve an Industrial Revolution, when Japan alone had about 31 million

1. Rundall, 1850, 32.

259


people living in a sophisticated market economy, and China had nearly 270
million? The million people in Edo (now Tokyo) in the eighteenth century,
for example, made it the largest city in the world at the time.

This challenge has been sharpened in recent years by such books as Ken-
neth Pomeranz’s The Great Divergence.2 Pomeranz suggests that in most re-
spects the densely settled core of China, areas such as the Yangzi Delta, was
indistinguishable from northwestern Europe in 1800 in terms of “commer-
cialization, commodification of goods, land, and labor, market-driven growth,
and adjustment by households of both fertility and labor allocation to eco-
nomic trends. He argues further that these patterns of market development
and specialization were not in themselves paths to “an industrial break-
through.” Both sets of economies were still firmly in “the proto-industrial cul
de  sac,” with incremental growth that could expand only population, not
living standards.3

Pomeranz thus insists the Industrial Revolution was not the next step on
a continuum, as argued here, but an abrupt and unexpected departure from
the stagnant preindustrial equilibrium. He finds the source of this break in
Europe in two accidents of geography—coal and colonies. For Pomeranz
the crucial barrier to rapid growth in the long-settled core of the world’s
economies was an ecological one. All societies before 1800 had to produce
resources—food, energy, raw materials—on a renewable basis from a fixed land
area.   The “advanced organic technology” of Europe and Asia was at its natu-
ral limits by 1800. The massive expansion in the output of energy-intensive
goods, such as iron, that characterized the Industrial Revolution was possible
only once new sources of energy and raw materials from outside the system
had been found.

Europe made this leap because it had coal reserves readily accessible to its
population centers.4 In addition it had the massive, largely empty land area
of the Americas relatively close at hand, to lift for a time the ecological con-
straint with a continent-sized flood of food and raw materials. These geo-
graphic advantages, rather than differences in innovative potential, explain
English success and Asian failure.

2. Pomeranz, 2000.

3. Ibid., 107, 264.

4. Even Pomeranz has to allow that it was the technological breakthrough of the New-
comen engine in 1712, permitting the drainage of deep mines, that made this coal available on
a large scale at the onset of the Industrial Revolution; Pomeranz, 2000, 66, 68.

260  chat R 3 


1.0

England

0.8


0.6

Yangzi Delta

0.4

0.2

0.0

0       100      200      300      400      500      600

Distance (kilometers)

Figure 3. Grain price correlation and distance, England and the Yangzi Delta, 1770–94.
Data from Shiue and Keller, 2006, figure 5.

Pomeranz is entirely correct that China, and indeed also Japan, differed
little from England in 1800 in respect to land, labor, and capital markets. Re-
cent research by Carol Shiue and Wolfgang Keller on grain markets in
1770–94, for example, supports the idea that grain markets were only mod-
estly better integrated in Europe than in China.5 Figure 13.1 shows the corre-
lation of annual grain prices with distance in England and the Yangzi Delta
in 1770–94. England was better integrated. Grain prices in any two locations
correlated better, suggesting that grain flowed more freely between local mar-
kets   in England. But the difference was modest. At a distance of 50 miles the
correlation of prices, which could be at maximum 1, was 0.88 in England com-
pared  to 0.77 in China. These were both markets in which grain was being
actively traded over considerable distances.6

But Pomeranz is caught in the Smithian straitjacket criticized above. He
assumes that markets and incentives are sufficient for rapid economic growth,

5. Shiue and Keller, 2006.

6. It should be noted that Shiue and Keller ascribe more significance to these differences.

wh  GL A ?   26


unless there is some other external impediment. If England grew but China,
with similarly extensive markets and well-defined property rights, did not,
then the problem must, he reasons, lie in some external constraint, such as
geography. But in discussing the Industrial Revolution I have emphasized
that   it was the product not of Smithian perfection of the market, but of a dif-
ferential response of people to market incentives that had long been present.

And on these dimensions, if we look at the visible correlates of the arrival
of the dynamic middle-class society—in particular levels of education and
interest rates—England was certainly ahead of its Asian competitors by 1800.7
Recent studies of Qing China (1644–1911) and Tokugawa Japan (1603–
1868)  have emphasized that these were not static, technologically ossified
societies, as has traditionally been assumed. Remarkably, given their isolation
from developments in Europe before 1800—the result of both distance and
government policy—they appear to have been changing in the same ways as
northwestern Europe. Education levels rose markedly in both Japan and
China between 1600 and 1800. In time, these countries would have had their
own Industrial Revolutions. Cotton was only introduced to Japan in the later
Middle Ages, and it was little grown before the Tokugawa era.8 Yet by the late
seventeenth century, despite Japan’s isolation by then from the rest of the
world,  an extensive domestic cotton textile industry, centered in Osaka, had
emerged.9 Though this was a handicraft industry, plenty of water power was
available, had the Japanese eventually chanced upon the innovations of In-

dustrial Revolution England.

But though these societies were on the path to an eventual Industrial
Revolution, they were progressing more slowly than England, and they had
not progressed as far as England by the late nineteenth century, when they
ended their self-imposed isolation from the West.

How Bourgeois Was Asia in 1800?

By 1800 Japan was the closest of the Asian economies to England in terms of
social characteristics. While Japan could eventually have developed an Indus-

7. Jack Goldstone has also emphasized that the advantage of England in 1800 was in its
greater propensity to innovate, though he grounds this English propensity in a complex mix-
ture of political crises and institutions within each society; Goldstone, 1987.

8. The first definitive reference to cotton cultivation in Japan is in 1429; Farris, 2006, 160.

9. Hauser, 1974.

262  chat R 3 


trial Revolution in isolation, at the start of the Tokugawa era in 1603 it had
the look more of medieval England than of England in 1760. Interest rates,
for example, were still high. In the mid-seventeenth century interest rates for
loans made to local governors (daimyo) in anticipation of receipts from the
land tax were 12–15 percent, even though these were secured loans. The bank-
ing system which developed in the late seventeenth century made loans on real
security such as buildings at rates averaging 15 percent, though more credit-
worthy borrowers could get lower rates.10

Literacy levels also seem to have been low at the beginning of the Toku-
gawa era. Literacy then was confined mainly to temple priests, and written
records were used only to document important matters like landholdings.11
The similarity of this society to the innumeracy of the medieval or Roman
world is revealed in the account of Japan in the years 1577–1610 by the Por-
tuguese Jesuit Joao Rodrigues. Commenting on the absence of diseases such
as  the plague, and the long lives of even ordinary Japanese, Rodrigues reports
his informants had assured him that “there was a man in the Hokkoku region
who lived seven hundred years, and we saw a reliable Christian who had seen
and met him, as well as many other pagans who knew him   Also in our

time there lived a robust man in the town of Chiriku, in the kingdom of
Hizen, who was one hundred and thirty years old and still played chess.”12 In
the Tokugawa period there was, however, a steady spread of literacy through
the ranks of society, as in England. By 1700 books were being printed in edi-
tions as large as ten thousand copies. Commercial lending libraries had even
emerged to meet popular demand.13 In the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
turies village schools (terakoya) were established with increasing frequency.
Before 1804, 558 such schools had been established; between 1804 and 1843 a

further 3,050 were founded; and from 1844 to 1867 6,691 were added.14 The
result was a literacy rate for men estimated at 40–50 percent by the time of
the Meiji Restoration of 1868, and a rate for women of 13–17 percent.15 These
rates were, however, still significantly lower than those achieved in north-
western Europe by the advent of the Industrial Revolution.

10. Crawcour, 1961, 350, 356. In this same period loans on good credit in England were
made at 5–6 percent, and at even lower rates in the Netherlands.

11. Dore, 1965, 1–2.

12. Rodrigues, 1973, 50–51.

13. Passin, 1965, 12.

14. Nakamura, 1981, 276.

15. Passin, 1965, 44–47.

wh  GL A ?   263


India, China, and Korea also retained characteristics into the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries that made them resemble medieval Europe or
the ancient world more than England on the eve of the Industrial Revolution.
There has been recent debate, for example, as to the relative living stan-
dards  in India versus England around 1800.16 This—as should be evident from
the discussion of the Malthusian economy in the first part of the book—tells
us nothing about the relative technological sophistication or growth potential of
these two economies. However, the paucity of wage quotes in India from any
time before 1856 speaks volumes about the relative sophistication of Indian

relative to English society before that time.

In England we have evidence on real wages from 1209 onward, and by
1275 such evidence comes from an abundance of sources. By the eighteenth
century there are wage data for hundreds of different towns throughout
England. There are wage quotes from churchwardens; town corporations; the
county magistrates who maintained bridges, jails, and prisons; London guilds
that paid for repairs to their properties; the royal household; larger religious
institutions such as Westminster Abbey; charitable institutions; Oxford and
Cambridge colleges; and the households and estate accounts of private mag-
nates. Thus we can calculate not just wages, but wages by type of worker, the
typical length of the workweek, wages by location, and even, for the years after
1800, implied daily hours of work.

In contrast, India, a continent-size society with a population at least ten
times that of England in 1800, has a startling poverty of wage, price, and
population records before the nineteenth century. If we exclude the reports of
the Dutch and English East India Companies and of British travelers, then
for the entire period 1200–1856 the only quotes on real wages that are avail-
able are from the Ain-I-Akbari, an account book of the Mogul emperor Ak-
bar in 1595, a handful of quotes from the Tamil Nadu archives from 1768 and
1800–02 utilized by Parthasarathi, and then from Maratha sources for Pune
circa 1820.17 The documentary record of medieval England by 1209 is in-
comparably superior to that of eighteenth-century India.

This paucity of documentation reflected a society with levels of nineteenth-
century literacy little greater than those for medieval England. The Indian

16. Parthasarathi, 1998; Broadberry and Gupta, 2006.

17. Divekar, 1989; Parthasarathi, 1998, 84.

264  chat R 3 


Figure 3.2 The bazaar at Vijaynagara (now Hampi), with a modern village school

operating in the ruins.

census as late as 1901, for example, reveals a literacy rate for men of 9.8 per-
cent, and for women of 0.6 percent.

Further evidence of the technological backwardness of at least southern
India in the preindustrial era comes from the area’s architecture. Vijaynagara,
the capital of the Vijaynagara Empire, which comprised all of southern India
from AD 1336 to 1660, was sacked in 1565 and then abandoned. The ruins
now cover an impressive nine square miles, where modern Indian villagers
in what is now called Hampi squat in crude shelters among imposing stone
arcades and temples (figure 13.2). Yet impressive as the scale of the monuments
is, and as elaborate as the decorative carvings are, the engineering of the
building is much less sophisticated than that achieved in Europe even before
the  end of the Middle Ages. The Pantheon in Rome, completed about AD
125, has a dome spanning 43 meters. The dome of the Duomo in Florence,
completed in 1436, spans 42 meters. These buildings required design and con-
struction skills an order of magnitude ahead of those evident at Vijaynagara.
China in 1800 seems to have occupied a place intermediate in social so-
phistication between Japan and India. John Lossing Buck’s survey of 1929–33

wh  GL A ?   265


suggests that 30 percent of men in China were literate. Between 1882 and
1930 there was seemingly no change in exposure to schooling, so this was
likely also the male literacy rate back in 1882. This observation led Evelyn
Rawski to conclude that late Qing China was “an advanced, complex society

. . . remarkably modern in many respects.”18 But this still places nineteenth-
century China only at the level of England in the seventeenth century.

The main vehicle of mass education in the Qing era was village-level
charitable schools. Since the number of such schools found by Rawski nearly
doubled between 1750–1800 and 1850–1900, educational exposure was most
likely only half as great in the late eighteenth century, suggesting that male
literacy might have been as low as 15 percent in 1800.19 This would imply
that, while China had high levels of education for a preindustrial society, they
were still significantly lower than for northwestern Europe at the commence-
ment of the Industrial Revolution.

Buck’s finding that the average return on land ownership over a variety of
locations in 1921–25 averaged 8.5 percent also makes China seem more simi-
lar to earlier societies than to England or the Netherlands in 1800.20 A study
of the return on land ownership in Korea over the years 1740–1900 similarly
found rates of return that exceeded 10 percent in most periods.21

Thus it seems that England’s Asian competitors in 1800, Japan, China,
and India, lagged behind it in establishing bourgeois society through all ranks
of the population. These societies, or at least Japan and China, were not
static, as Smith and Malthus assumed. They were evolving along the same
path as northwestern Europe, at least in terms of the spread of education. But
they had not evolved as far.

Why Was Asia behind Europe?

I have emphasized that social evolution in England had a biological basis,
that it was driven by the selective survival of types in an institutionally stable
society of private property rights. That raises the issue of why, given the even
longer history of stable property rights in China and Japan at least, the same

18. Rawski, 1979, 17–18, 140; quotation on page 140.

19. Ibid., 90.

20. Buck, 1930, 158.

21. Jun and Lewis, 2006, figure 7.

266  chat R 3 


Table 3. Population Growth in England, Japan,
China, 1300–1750

Period      England     Japan     China

ca. 1300      5.9       6       72

ca. 1750      6.2       31      270

Sources: England, Clark, 2007a. Japan, Farris, 2006, 26, 165;
estimated population in 1280 5.7–6.2 million. China, Perkins,
1969, 16; value for 1300 is estimated population in 1393.

process had not operated there to generate the same conclusion at an earlier
date.

Here the limitations of Chinese and Japanese demographic data before
1800, and their almost complete absence in India, push us into the realm of
speculation. But we can point to two possible explanations.

The first is that, surprisingly, the Malthusian constraints seem to have
operated much more tightly on England than on either Japan or China in the
years 1300–1750. Table 13.1 shows the populations of all three countries esti-
mated for years close to 1300 and then for 1750. In England the population
barely grew over these 450 years. In Japan, however, it is estimated to have in-
creased fivefold, while in China the increase was more than threefold. The bite
of  the Malthusian constraints was tighter in England than in Asia. The pro-
cesses of selective survival were actually more severe in preindustrial England.
China’s rapid population growth is due in part to its having been a fron-

tier society, in which there was constant migration of Han Chinese from the
core of the country to underpopulated regions in the south and west. Thus
the cultivated area in China was estimated to have grown from 62 million
acres in 1393 to 158 million acres by 1770, explaining most of the population
growth.22 In England, in contrast, the cultivated area in 1300 seems to have
been almost as great as that in 1750. There was no new land to expand to.
Japan was able to expand its population so greatly because of remarkable in-
creases in the yields of rice cultivation.

The second difference between England on the one hand and Japan and
China on the other is that income-based differences in fertility seem to have

22. Perkins, 1969.

wh  GL A ?   267


been much less pronounced in both Japan and China. The rich do not seem
to have been spreading constantly downward through the ranks of Japanese
and Chinese society, bringing with them middle-class attitudes and culture,
as they did in England. Unfortunately, the richer groups we observe are both
from the hereditary nobility: samurai in Japan and the Qing nobility in
China. It would be helpful to be able to study richer commoners as well, but
these records are not available.

In Japan we have evidence on the reproductive success of the samurai
class through records of adoption frequency. To maintain the line adoption
was used whenever the head of the lineage had no surviving son at death or
retirement from office. The samurai studied were local officials who had the
hereditary rights to offices with attached stipends that in most cases ranged
from  50 to 15,000 koku of rice. Since 10 koku of rice was the equivalent of the
annual wage of a laborer in seventeenth-century England these samurai were
very wealthy even by English standards.

Yet these families had to resort to high rates of adoption. In the seven-
teenth century, a time of rapid population growth for the population as a
whole in Japan, the adoption rate was 26.1 percent, implying fertility rates
among samurai similar to those of the rich in England. However, the adop-
tion rate rose to 36.6 percent in the eighteenth century, implying that samurai
net fertility was then equivalent to that of someone owning only 4 acres of
land or a cottage in England. The adoption rate was even higher, at 39.3 per-
cent, by the nineteenth century. Figure 13.3 shows the frequency of samurai
with a surviving son by century compared to that frequency in England in
1620–38 as a function of wealth. The average wealth of the samurai would place
them in the highest English wealth classes. Thus after 1700 their implied fer-
tility was much lower than that for the English rich.

Since in England about 55 percent of men with a net replacement rate
of 1 had surviving sons, this implies that after 1700 the samurai, despite their
considerable wealth, had a net replacement rate only modestly above that of
the general population in Japan in a time of population stasis. Since the
adoptees were overwhelmingly younger sons from samurai families with mul-
tiple sons, there was no flood of position-less samurai into the ranks of the
commoners in preindustrial Japan.23

23. Moore, 1969, 619. Yanamura, 1974, 104, gives evidence for bannermen, an even richer
class of Edo samurai, that implies an even higher adoption rate in the eighteenth century of
52 percent.

268  chat R 3 


1.0


0.8

19th-century samurai
17th-century samurai

18th-century samurai

Replacement fertility

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0-9    10-24    25-49    50-99   100-249   250-499   500-999   1,000+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 3.3 Samurai net fertility by century compared to English net fertility 1620–38 by size
of bequest.

In China the evidence for the fertility of the elite comes from the ge-
nealogical archives of the Qing imperial lineage. The group studied were
members of the royal family resident in Beijing in the period 1644–1840. For
this group Wang Feng, James Lee, and Cameron Campbell have calculated,
by decade of the birth of the first child, the total number of births per mar-
ried man living to age 45 or greater for monogamous and polygamous
men.24 Using their data figure 13.4 displays a roughly calculated measure of
the “total fertility rate” of all men of the imperial lineage.25 This declines
from about 7 in the early eighteenth century to an average of 4.8 for the pe-
riod 1750–1849.

This rate is above the overall estimated total fertility rate for men in
preindustrial China, which is only about 4.2.26 But the difference in favor of

24. Feng et al., 1995, 387.

25. It is only a rough calculation since Feng et al. do not report the percentage of men un-
married by decade, nor the fraction of monogamous and polygamous marriages.

26. In chapter 4 we saw that the total fertility rate for married women was about 5, but
that about a fifth of men would never marry because of infanticide.

wh  GL A ?   269


10

Rich English

8

Qing imperial lineage

6

English average

4

Chinese average

2

0

1700     1720     1740     1760     1780     1800     1820     1840

Decade of birth of first child

Figure 3.4 Male total fertility rate for the Qing imperial lineage.

the imperial lineage is relatively modest. The same diagram shows the total
overall fertility rate for men in England before 1790, about 4.75, compared to
the total fertility rate of rich men from the sample of wills in the seventeenth
century, about 8.1. There the differences in favor of the rich are much more
dramatic.

We see from both these examples of the rich in preindustrial Japan and
China, admittedly for somewhat specialized groups, that rich men seem to
have a reproductive advantage over poor men. However, it is also evident that
their advantage is much less pronounced than in preindustrial England. An
explanation of this difference is beyond the reach of the sources at hand. But
the wave of downward mobility that washed over preindustrial England would
have been a mere ripple in the case of China and Japan.

Thus to the questions “Why England? Why not China, India, or Japan?”
the answer seems to be as follows. China and Japan, with their longer history
of settled stable agrarian systems, were independently headed on a trajectory
similar to that of northwestern Europe during the period 1600–1800. They
were not static societies. However, this process occurred more slowly than in
England. Two important factors may help explain this. Population growth was

270  chat R 3 


faster in both China and Japan than in England in the period 1300–1750.
And the demographic system in both these societies gave less reproductive
advantage to the wealthy than in England. Thus we may speculate that
England’s advantage lay in the rapid cultural, and potentially also genetic,
diffusion of the values of the economically successful throughout society in
the years 1200–1800.

wh  GL A ?   27


4  Social Consequences

In proportion, therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work increases, the wage
decreases.          —Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (1848)1

The Industrial Revolution was driven by the expansion of knowledge. Yet,
stunningly, unskilled labor has reaped more gains than any other group. Marx
and Engels, trumpeting their gloomy prognostications in The Communist
Manifesto in 1848, could not have been more wrong about the fate of un-
skilled workers. Figure 14.1 shows a typical image of Industrial Revolution
misery that somehow has worked its way into modern popular consciousness.2
The reality is very different. By 1815 real wages in England for both farm la-
borers and the urban unskilled had begun the inexorable rise that has created
affluence for all.3

Nor was it even the case that the gains to land and capital initially ex-
ceeded those of labor. From 1760 to 1860 real wages in England rose faster than
real output per person.4 The innovators, the owners of capital, the owners of
land, and the owners of human capital all experienced modest rewards, or no
rewards, from advances in knowledge. Thus modern growth, right from its

1. Marx and Engels, 1967, 87.

2. A Google search under the terms “Industrial Revolution” and “misery” returned

217,000 pages.

3. Clark, 2001b, 2005.

4. See figure 14.4, which shows that wages rose as a share of national income between
1750 and 1860. Allen, 2005, 1, states, to the contrary, that “Between 1800 and 1840, GDP per
worker rose 37 percent, real wages stagnated and the profit rate doubled.” This result, however,
is grounded on the real wage series of Feinstein, 1998, which Clark, 2001b, 2005, shows to be
too pessimistic. The earlier, more optimistic, real wage series of Lindert and Williamson, 1983,
1985, turns out to be accurate.

272


Figure 4. Able-bodied poor breaking stones for roads in Bethnal Green, London, 1868.

start, by benefiting the most disadvantaged groups in preindustrial society,
particularly unskilled workers, has reduced inequality within societies.

But while growth so far has been benign, there is no guarantee that it will
continue to promote equality within societies. We may soon face the gloomy
dystopia feared by so many writers, in which the wages of unskilled labor
drop below the socially determined “subsistence wage” and societies are
forced to support a large fraction of the population permanently through the
public purse.

Sharing the Spoils

To see why unskilled labor enjoyed the bulk of the gains from efficiency ad-
vance in the modern economy, note that, when more output is produced per
unit of capital, labor, and land engaged in production, the average payments
to these three factors of production must increase. But there is nothing in the
fundamental equation of growth that describes exactly how the factors share
the   gains. All that must happen formally is that

gA = agr + bgw + cgs,

socal c os Q U cs   273


200

150

100

50

0

1200    1300    1400    1500    1600    1700    1800    1900    2000

Figure 4.2 Real farmland rents per acre in England, 1210–2000.

where gr , gw , and gs are the growth rates of the real payments to capital, la-
bor, and land. A 1 percent gain in efficiency must average a 1 percent increase
in payments to the factors of production. But the equation alone allows an
infinity of patterns of gains, and even of losses.

Land, in the long run, received none of the gains from the Industrial
Revolution. David Ricardo, the first economist to focus explicitly on the dis-
tribution of income, writing in the England of 1817 during the early years of
the Industrial Revolution, foresaw a future in which wages would stay at sub-
sistence, land rents would increase, and the return on capital would decline
as population increased, because land was the fixed factor in production.5
The actual future in England could hardly have been more different.

Figure 14.2 shows the real rents of farmland, the nominal rent per acre di-
vided by the average price of goods, in England from 1210 to 2000. Real farm-
land rents peaked in the late nineteenth century, but they have declined since.
The rent of an acre of farmland in England currently buys only as many goods
as it did in the 1760s. Indeed the real earnings of an acre of land are little

5. Ricardo, 1821.

274  chat R 4 


higher than in the early thirteenth century.6 Without the Common Agricul-
tural Policy subsidies to farmers, the real earnings from land would undoubt-
edly be less than in the High Middle Ages.

As farmland rents declined, urban rents increased. Indeed in 2000 in
England, while an acre of farmland sold for an average of £2,900, an acre of
potential building land cost £263,000, and an acre of building land for which
permission to build had already been secured was worth £613,000.7 But as
figure 10.3 shows, even in densely populated England, where rents for urban
sites may be two or three times the level in most countries at this income
level, they are still only about 4 percent of national income.8

Because there is a fixed stock of land, the failure of real rents per acre to
increase significantly has meant that, as economic output marched upward,
the share of land rents in national income has correspondingly declined to
insignificance (as is shown in figure 10.3). Precisely because land is in fixed
supply, this result, so contrary to the Ricardian expectation, is surprising. It is
considered further below.

Physical capital owners also received none of the gains from growth. The
real rental of capital (net depreciation) is just the real interest rate. But con-
sider figure 9.1. It shows that the real interest rate, if anything, declined since
the Industrial Revolution.

Total payments to capital have expanded enormously since the Industrial
Revolution, but only because the stock of capital grew rapidly. The stock of
capital  has been indefinitely expandable. It has grown as fast as output, and
its abundance has kept real returns per unit of capital low. The product agr

has been 0. Thus all the efficiency gains have shown up as wage increases.

That is

gA ≈ bgw.

6. These statements do not take into account changes in the value of urban land, for
which it is difficult to get long-term measures, and for which the implicit rental value rose by
greater amounts. But even taking this into account, landowners have profited little from the
productivity growth since the Industrial Revolution.

7. Farmland prices from United Kingdom, Department of Environment, Food, and Rural
Affairs, 2005, table 4.3. Building land prices from United Kingdom, Department of Commu-
nities and Local Government, 2007, tables 561, 563.

8. The U.S. Department of Defense overseas housing allowances imply that the cost of
rental housing in England is nearly double that of other European countries at the same income
level. Thus urban site rents would be no more than 2 percent of all income in these countries.

socal c os Q U cs   275


800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

1200    1300    1400    1500    1600    1700    1800    1900    2000

Figure 4.3 Real hourly wages for building laborers in England, 1220–2000. Data from Clark,

2005.

Since b ≈ 0.75, every 1 percent efficiency advance since the Industrial Revo-
lution has thus tended to increase wages on average by 1.3 percent.

We might have expected wage gains to have gone disproportionately to
skilled workers with much human capital, especially since innovation and
new technology were the basis of growth. But as figure 9.4 showed unskilled
male wages in England have risen more since the Industrial Revolution than
skilled wages, and this result holds for all advanced economies.9 The wage
premium for skilled building workers has declined from about 100 percent in
the thirteenth century to 25 percent today. Figure 14.3 shows the real wages
per hour for building laborers, the unskilled, in England from 1220 to 2000.
The enormous gains even for these unskilled workers are evident.

A simple interpretation of the shrunken skill premium is that it is at least
partly the result of the declining rate of return on capital. The wage pattern
over a lifetime for skilled workers is typically that in the earliest years they
earn less than the unskilled, since they have to spend time training or work-
ing as an apprentice to acquire their skills. In the preindustrial period parents

9. Van Zanden, 2004.

276  chat R 4 


would often have to pay a significant lump sum for a child to secure an ap-
prenticeship. The relative supply of skilled workers will thus be influenced by
the interest rate on capital. At high interest rates, such as prevailed in the
medieval era, financing training through borrowing is expensive, and funds
spent on training have a high return if invested elsewhere. Hence we would
expect the skill premium to be higher in high-interest-rate societies.

Another trend is the narrowing gap between men’s and women’s wages.
In the preindustrial era women’s wages averaged less than half of men’s. Even
in unskilled occupations the gap was great. Women’s wages as field laborers
in England over the years 1770–1860 were only 43 percent those of male farm
laborers.10 Now unskilled female workers in the United Kingdom earn 80
percent of the male unskilled hourly wage.11

The low wages of unskilled women laborers in the preindustrial era seem-
ingly did not reflect discrimination against women once they entered the la-
bor market (though there was undoubtedly a prejudice against training women
for skilled occupations). Preindustrial societies typically had little objection
to hiring women as brute laborers. In England, for example, women show
up as basic agricultural laborers, weeding grains and reaping, in the very ear-
liest records from the thirteenth century. Where women had a comparative
advantage in tasks that required more dexterity than strength, such as in reap-
ing   or winnowing grain, they were widely employed. In building in the me-
dieval period, thatchers’ assistants were often female, since the preparation of
the straw was not a task requiring great strength. The low relative pay for
women seems instead to have reflected the premium attached to physical
strength in a world where humans still supplied brute strength.12 In an era in
which men and donkeys were relatively close equivalents, women competed
at  a disadvantage.

The Industrial Revolution improved woman’s economic position in two
ways. Rising incomes switched the emphasis of production away from sectors
such as agriculture (which demanded strength) toward such sectors as manu-
facturing and service (in which dexterity was more important) through the
operation of Engel’s law (see chapter 3). And the Industrial Revolution’s in-
novations in power delivery eventually reduced the demand for humans as

10. Burnette, 1997; Clark, 2003.

11. United Kingdom, Office of National Statistics, 2006a.

12. Burnette, 1997.

socal c os Q U cs  277


suppliers of brute strength. Instead skills such as dexterity or social interaction,
in which women had no disadvantage, became more important.

For England in the late nineteenth century we have measures of men’s
and women’s comparative productivity on such textile factory tasks as weav-
ing. In 1886 women cotton weavers in Lancashire averaged 82 percent of male
weavers’ production. Nevertheless the average woman in cotton textiles earned
just  68 percent of the average man’s wages because only men filled such skilled
occupations as foreman, mechanic, or mule spinner.13 But despite these bar-
riers   to promotion, their relative wage was already an improvement over the
situation in preindustrial agriculture.

By reducing the gap in earnings between men and women the Industrial
Revolution again narrowed overall inequality in modern societies. Thus the
payment per unit of unskilled labor rose farther as a result of the Industrial
Revolution than the payment for land, the payment for capital, or even the
payment per unit of skilled labor.

Income Inequality

While the rewards for the different types of factors cooperating in production
are unambiguous, the distribution of income across individuals or families
makes for a more complex story. For each family possesses a portfolio of un-
skilled labor, skilled labor, land, and capital. And the amounts of some of the
elements in this portfolio, particularly skilled labor and capital, have expanded
greatly with modern growth. In addition income inequality is not something
that can be measured by one number: how best to measure it depends on how
important to the inquirer are income differences at different points in the
distribution.

Did the Industrial Revolution on average increase or reduce income in-
equality, even before taxing and redistributing measures, in modern industrial
societies? There is an enormous literature that debates whether there was an
initial association between faster growth and inequality, the so-called Kuznets
curve, in the transition out of the Malthusian state.14 There is not enough
room here to address that issue in any detail, though the faster growth of real

13. Wood, 1910, 620–24.

14. See van Zanden, 1995, on this in Europe on the eve of the Industrial Revolution.

278  chat R 4 


Table 4. Distribution of Wages and Wealth, United
Kingdom, 2003–04

Decile     Share of wages    Share of wealth

90–100        26           45

80–90        14           16

70–80        12           10

60–70        10           10

50–60         9           8

40–50         8           5

30–40         7           4

20–30         6           2

10–20         5           0

0–10         4           0

Sources: United Kingdom, Office of National Statistics, 2006a;
United Kingdom, H.M. Revenue and Customs, 2007, table 13.1.
Note: The wage distribution is for full-time adult workers.

Wealth ownership is the assets of those dying in 2003.

wages versus real income, and the stability of the skill premium over these years,
suggest that rising inequality was unlikely.15

Instead the question addressed is whether in the long run Malthusian
economies were likely to have had greater inequality than modern industrial-
ized economies. On balance it would seem that even pretax income is more
equally distributed than in the preindustrial world.

We saw that the payments per unit rose only for labor and increased most
for unskilled labor. But there has also been an enormous increase in the stock
of physical capital per person. In all societies the ownership of capital and
land tends to be highly unequal, with a large share of the population pos-
sessing no marketable wealth. Table 14.1, for example, shows the distribution
of wage income in the United Kingdom in 2003–04 (for full-time workers)
compared to the distribution of marketable wealth. Despite the much greater
importance of human capital in modern societies than in earlier economies,
the distribution of wages is still much more equal than the distribution of the

15. Partly driving the idea that inequality must have increased have been indicators of liv-
ing standards, such as food consumption and heights, which in the Industrial Revolution did
not rise as much as the real wage series would imply; Mokyr, 1988; Komlos, 1998.

socal c os Q U cs  279


100

Capital share

80

Farmland share

60                                  Urban land share

40

Labor share

20

0

1750       1800       1850       1900       1950       2000

Figure 4.4 Shares of labor, capital, and land in net national income in England, 1750–2000.
The urban and farmland shares were derived as in figure 10.3.

ownership of capital. The lowest-paid decile still gets about 40 percent of the
average wage, and the highest-paid decile gets less than three times the average
wage. With increased wealth the poorest decile has none, while the richest
decile has five times the average wealth per person.

Thus one crucial determinant of inequality in any society is the share of
labor income in all income. The larger this is, ceteris paribus, the lower in-
equality will tend to be. Figure 14.4 shows this share for England from 1750
to 2004. The share of labor in net national income seems to have risen from
about 0.63 in the early eighteenth century to closer to 0.75 today. There is
reason to believe that this trend must be a general one in the transition be-
tween the Malthusian era and the modern world. Land rents were typically
20–30 percent of income in settled agrarian societies, so that, once we also
allow for returns to capital, the share of labor in all incomes was lower in the
preindustrial world.

Earlier, in foraging societies that had no individual ownership of land and
almost no capital goods, labor income accounted for essentially all income.
Thus over the long stretch of human history there may well have been a type
of Kuznets curve. The Neolithic Revolution, which brought settled agriculture,
greatly increased the share of assets in all income, raising inequality. But the

280  chat R 4 


Table 4.2 Preindustrial Wealth Distributions

Location       Source   Year   Top 1%  Top 5%  Gini coefficient
Perugiaa        Taxes   1285   18     29      0.72

Parisb          Taxes   1292    26     52      0.75

Londonb        Taxes   1319    34     57      0.76

Florencec        Taxes   1427    27     67      0.79

England (Suffolk)d   Estates  1630    19     50      0.83

Englande        Estates  1670    49     73       —

Estates  1740    44     74       —

Estates  1875    61     74       —

United Kingdomf    Estates  2003    17     32      0.60

Sources: aBlanshie, 1979, 603. bSussman, 2005, table 9. cVan Zanden, 1995, table 1. dCalculated
from the sample described in Clark and Hamilton, 2006, assuming those without wills had
zero wealth. eLindert, 1986, 1145. fSource as for table 12.2.

Industrial Revolution, by wiping out the value of land as an asset, has again
raised the importance of labor in income determination. Since labor—the
one income source of which every citizen has an equal allocation and the one
income source that people cannot alienate—has become more important in
the modern world, this trend promotes income equality.

Furthermore, the existing evidence suggests that in the Malthusian world,
at least in Europe, wealth inequality was greater than that after the Industrial
Revolution. Table 14.2 shows different measures of wealth inequality going
back   to 1285 for various places in Europe. These are the share of assets held
by the top 1 percent and 5 percent of households or persons, and the Gini co-
efficient of the wealth distribution.16

All these samples suggest great wealth inequality in the preindustrial
world compared to the typical industrialized country today. The earliest of
these samples are household tax assessments based on assets in large cities such
as London and Paris. They may show greater inequality than for countries as
a whole because of the special conditions of large cities.17 But the sample of

16. A Gini coefficient of 0 implies complete equality; a Gini of 1, that one person owns
everything.

17. Van Zanden, 1995, notes that the degree of wealth inequality was less in the Tuscan
countryside than in Florence in 1427.

socal c os Q U cs   28


Table 4.3 Unskilled Incomes Relative to Average Incomes, England

1770s 1850s  2004

Annual wage, unskilled men              £15.4  £27.2  £16,898

Annual wage, unskilled women             £6.9  £12.3  £12,516

Ratio of female to male workers            0.38*   0.38    0.79

Annual wage, unskilled couple, per person       £10.4  £18.5  £13,393
Average adult (16+) income             £22.0  £40.0  £23,452
Unskilled worker, average income relative to all adults  47%  46%    57%

Sources: Earnings in 2004 from the United Kingdom, Office of National Statistics, 2006a.
Notes: * denotes value assumed to be the same as in the 1850s. Agricultural laborers are taken
as the unskilled laboring class in the 1770s and 1850s.

English wills circa 1630 is for a representative subgroup of the population.
Since it is based on bequests it is very similar to the modern wealth inequality
data for England derived by the Department of Revenue and Customs. Asset
inequality was greater in 1630 than in 2000, whether we measure the share of
the  top 1 or 5 percent or the Gini coefficient. The estimates by Peter Lindert for
the entire population of households in England in 1670, 1740, and 1875 find
even greater inequality compared to modern data.

Thus assets were a greater share of total income in the preindustrial
world, and assets were held more unequally than in recent years.

Table 14.2 focused on the position of the upper-income groups; it says
little about the position of the unskilled wage laborer over time relative to the
rest of society. Table 14.3 attempts in a crude way to measure that parameter
for England. It shows the annual pretax earnings of an unskilled laboring
couple, per adult, relative to average income per adult in the society as a
whole. In 1770 and 1851 agricultural laborers were taken as representing un-
skilled workers. In 1770 the family of a male agricultural laborer would earn
an average of £10.4 per person, assuming women were employed in the same
proportion as at the 1851 census. These earnings would represent 47 percent
of   the average income per adult in the society. This ratio was unchanged by
1851, even though farm wages declined relative to urban wages with the great
growth of English cities and the migration out of the countryside. But by 2004
a typical couple in which both members were unskilled laborers would earn
57 percent of the average income per adult in the United Kingdom. Thus the

282  chat R 4 


Table 4.4 Life Prospects of Rich and Poor in England

Stature

(males,      Life     Surviving    Literacy
Period, group   centimeters)    expectancy    children     (%)

Preindustrial

Rich        174.0       39        3.85      85

Poor        168.5       33        1.93     30

Difference       3%       18%       99%     183%

Modern

Rich        178.2       80.8       1.33     100

Poor        176.0       74.3       1.64     88

Difference       1%        9%      –19%      14%

Sources: Preindustrial: Statures, 1790s, 1800s: Poor, 20- to 23-year-old English soldiers; Komlos,

1998, 781. Rich, Sandhurst cadets, adjusting heights of 15-year-olds to 19-year-olds by adding

11.5 cm; Komlos, 2004, figure 7.14. Life expectancy, surviving children, and literacy: Based
on testators circa 1630 leaving less than £25 in assets versus those leaving £1,000 or more;
Modern: Stature, 1991: parent social class I (professional) and II (intermediate) versus social
class  IV (skilled manual) and V (unskilled manual); Power et al., 2002, 132; Life expectancy,
1997–2001, social class I versus social class V. United Kingdom, Office of National Statistics,
2006b, tables 1, 3. Surviving children, 1999: children in household by income; Dickmann,
2003,  17. Literacy, 2003: percentage not achieving entry-level literacy, social class V, United
Kingdom, Department of Education and Skills, 2003, 3.

poorest families seem to have improved their relative position in England as
a result of the Industrial Revolution.

Inequality in Life Prospects

This far we have discussed only material incomes. But other aspects of the
quality of life include life expectancy, health, numbers of surviving children,
and literacy.18 On all these other dimensions the differences between rich
and poor have probably narrowed since the Industrial Revolution. Table 14.4
shows the differences in stature, life expectancy, surviving children, and lit-
eracy for the rich and the poor circa 1630 (except for stature) and 2000 in
England.

18. Thus the United Nations World Development Report ranks countries through a Human
Development Index, which includes measures of life expectancy and education.

socal c os Q U cs   283


In the preindustrial world the rich were significantly taller than the poor.
Sandhurst cadets circa 1800 were nearly 6 centimeters taller than regular army
soldiers. Based on the numbers of surviving children, and on adult life ex-
pectancy for testators of different asset classes, the life expectancy of the poor-
est testators was only 33 at birth, compared to 39 for the richest, a difference of
18 percent. Furthermore, rich testators had twice as many surviving children,
and nearly triple the chance of being literate. Thus the life prospects for the
rich were markedly better than those for the poor in the preindustrial era.

By 2000 these differences in life prospects still existed, but they were
much more muted, and in some respect the poor had an advantage. The rich
are still taller, but by very modest amounts. By 1991 men whose origins were
in professional families were only 1 percent taller than those from laboring
backgrounds. They still have greater life expectancy, but the difference is rel-
atively small. And now the rich in England have fewer children than the poor,
so  if children are to be counted a blessing and not a burden the advantage
now lies with the poor (though in some other advanced economies there is no
difference between rich and poor in this respect).19 The gap in literacy rates
between rich and poor has also narrowed sharply.

Thus, in terms of the general life prospects of the rich and the poor, the
Industrial Revolution seems to have narrowed the differences even more than
would be suggested by measures of income distribution or asset distribution
alone.

Why Did Landowners Not Receive the Gains?

Given that we had an Industrial Revolution that first improved the produc-
tivity of the industrial sector relative to the agricultural, why did landowners
not benefit hugely from an increased scarcity of land as population and in-
comes rose rapidly after 1800, as Ricardo imagined would happen? The rea-
sons that land saw declines in real returns, after some initial gains early in the
Industrial Revolution, are threefold.

First, the income elasticity of the demand for many land-intensive prod-
ucts has been low. Thus the number of calories consumed per day by modern
high-income consumers is lower than that for workers before the Industrial
Revolution, because a major determinant of calorie consumption is the amount
of physical labor people undertake.

19. Dickmann, 2003.

284  chat R 4 


In the preindustrial era people supplied a lot of the power in production,
whether as farm laborers digging, hauling, and threshing, or as wood hewers,
brick makers, metal formers, or porters. In our society not only do we have
machines to perform all these tasks, we also have machines to move us from
house to coffee shop to workplace. Within these workplaces machines haul us
up and down between floors. Thus, despite our very high incomes and rela-
tively large stature, the average male in the modern United States consumes
only about 2,700 kilocalories per day, and many have nevertheless gained
substantial amounts of weight. In the 1860s male farm workers in some areas
of Britain, generally smaller and lighter than modern U.S. males, took in
some 4,500 kilocalories per day.20 They consumed this much because they en-
gaged in physical labor ten hours a day for three hundred days per year. Thus,
as incomes expanded, the demand for land for production did not expand
proportionately.

Second, there has been enormous growth in the productivity of agri-
culture, specifically in land-saving technologies, so that, despite being restricted
by   a largely fixed supply of land, farm output has risen faster than population.
Third, the mining of fossil fuels, principally coal and oil, has provided for
modern societies the energy of which agriculture used to be a major provider.
By mining the energy produced by the land over eons, and stored in the
ground for the ages, our society has at least temporarily expanded the land
supply by enormous amounts. By the 1860s in England, for example, farm
outputs were worth £114 million per year. Coal outputs by that date, valued
as deliveries to consumers, were £66 million per year, so that energy from coal

already added a huge supplement to the output of the agricultural sector.21

Technological Advance and Unskilled Wages

We think of the Industrial Revolution as practically synonymous with mech-
anization, with the replacement of human labor by machine labor. Why in
high-income economies is there still a robust demand for unskilled labor?
Why   do unskilled immigrants with little command of English still walk across
the deserts of the U.S. Southwest to get to the major urban labor markets to
reap enormous rewards for their labor, even as undocumented workers? Why

20. Clark et al., 1995.

21. Clark, 2002b; Clark and Jacks, 2007.

socal c os Q U cs   285


were there people camped out for months and even years at the Channel Tun-
nel freight depot in northern France, waiting for a chance to break through
the security fence and hop onto a train for Britain?

Soon after the arrival of the Industrial Revolution the machinery ques-

tion became a matter of debate among political economists. Would new labor-
saving machines reduce the demand for labor? Famously Ricardo, who had
initially defended the introduction of machinery as benefiting all, by 1821
constructed a model according to which some types of labor-saving machin-
ery produce technological unemployment.22 His demonstration, however,
relied on workers receiving a fixed subsistence wage, and it was later appreci-
ated that, as long as there are sufficient substitution possibilities between cap-
ital and labor, there will always be a positive marginal product for each type
of labor (see chapter 2), and hence the possibility of full employment.

This general reassurance from economic reasoning is of little practical
value, however, since it offers no assurance on what the actual level of wages
will be. Why was it that there was not only a job for all unskilled workers, but
a well-paying one? After all, there was a type of employee at the beginning
of the Industrial Revolution whose job and livelihood largely vanished in the
early twentieth century. This was the horse. The population of working horses
actually peaked in England long after the Industrial Revolution, in 1901,
when 3.25 million were at work. Though they had been replaced by rail for
long-distance haulage and by steam engines for driving machinery, they still
plowed fields, hauled wagons and carriages short distances, pulled boats on
the canals, toiled in the pits, and carried armies into battle. But the arrival of
the internal combustion engine in the late nineteenth century rapidly displaced
these workers, so that by 1924 there were fewer than two million.23 There was
always a wage at which all these horses could have remained employed. But
that wage was so low that it did not pay for their feed, and it certainly did not
pay enough to breed fresh generations of horses to replace them. Horses were
thus an early casualty of industrialization.

Many tasks performed by people seemed as replaceable as those of horses.
And indeed a number of human tasks were quickly mechanized. Threshing
grains, the staple winter occupation, which absorbed as much as a quarter of
agricultural labor input, was mechanized by the 1860s. Reaping and mowing

22. Ricardo, 1821

23. Thompson, 1976, 80.

286  chat R 4 


Figure 4.5 McDonald’s—the foundation of an egalitarian society?

followed later in the nineteenth century. But the grim future of a largely un-
skilled and unemployable labor force has not come to pass. Instead the earn-
ings of these unskilled workers, as shown in figure 14.3, have risen relative to
those of the skilled.

There seem to be two explanations for the relatively high value to the mod-
ern economy of even unskilled labor. The first is that, unlike horses, people
have attributes that machines so far cannot replace, or can only replace at too
high a cost. People supply not just power but also dexterity. We are very good
at identifying objects and manipulating them in space, and machines are still
surprisingly poor at these tasks. Thus the fast-food industry that feeds a highly
standardized product to legions of Americans every day still does so using
human labor to bring meat to heat and seared flesh to bun (figure 14.5). Houses
and hotel rooms are still cleaned by maids, gardens are still weeded by garden-
ers. People guide trucks and cars on highways, and they guide powered tools in
farming, mining, and construction. Supermarkets contain thousands of stan-
dardized packages of product, but they are still placed on the shelves by people,
and priced and bundled at checkout by people. Recently there have been
attempts to develop services through which customers order groceries on the
web and have them delivered to their homes. Some purveyors invested in large

socal c os Q U cs  287


custom-designed automated warehouses where machines assembled the order
from the previously encoded instructions of the customer and packed them into
containers. These attempts were unsuccessful, however, and the surviving on-
line grocery purveyors now combine high-tech ordering with unskilled work-
ers who pick the goods from the shelves and pack them into containers.

Ironically computers have found it much easier to replace what we think
of as the higher cognitive functions of humans—determining amounts due,
calculating engineering stresses, taking integrals—than to replace the simple
skills  we think of even the most unlearned as possessing.

Another difficult-to-replace ability of humans is our ability to interact
with other people. We have a social intelligence that alerts us, at least in part,
to the thoughts and moods of others, and that ability can be very valuable in
modern commerce. The increasing returns to scale inherent in most modern
production processes imply that for the typical transaction the price, p, is
much greater than the marginal cost, mc, the cost of producing the last unit
of the good sold. That means that modern markets for industrial products—
unlike the markets for farm produce in the preindustrial era, when for all
goods p = mc—are imperfectly competitive.

The difference between price and marginal cost means that producers
have an incentive to spend resources in trying to sell more product at the cur-
rent price, through trying to get customers to choose their products rather
than the nearly identical products of their competitors. Selling is a huge part
of modern economies, and on the front lines in that war of commerce people
are still very useful foot soldiers. A pleasant interaction with the seller can make
customers choose to eat in this restaurant as opposed to that one, to shop here
as opposed to there. Customer service agents in call centers are thus now
guided by computers through decision trees that instruct them how to interact
with customers. They are not called upon to exercise much judgment or dis-
cretion; they are simply the human face of a planned strategy of interaction—
but  a face that is still necessary.

The past in this respect, however, is no guide to the future. As long as
computer processing power continues to become cheaper, the threat will al-
ways be present that these last scarce attributes of even unskilled human labor
will lose their value. Then there truly will be a class of displaced workers forced
to look to the charity of their fellow citizens for their subsistence.

We have considered two attributes of the human machine that are hard
to replace. The other factor that has kept unskilled wages high since the In-

288  chat R 4 


dustrial Revolution has been the unexpected curtailment in the supply of
people in the most rapidly growing economies. We saw for the Malthusian
era in England that the more income and assets people had at the time of
their deaths the more surviving children they had. Economic success and re-
productive success went hand in hand. If this pattern had continued to the
present, the population would have grown enormously, and the Ricardian
dystopia in which growth is eventually curtailed by the fixed amount of land
would have been closer to realization. I now consider these demographic
changes in detail.

The Demographic Transition

Demography mattered crucially to living standards in the Malthusian era be-
cause the fixed factor, land, was an important share of national income. Any
increase in population substantially reduced living standards.

After the Industrial Revolution the share of land and natural resources
in national income has dropped to insignificance in the industrialized world.
Demography would thus seemingly be a minor cause of the surprising shift of
income  to unskilled labor. Only in the poorest countries, as in sub-Saharan
Africa, and in those with large endowments of natural resources, such as Saudi
Arabia, do population levels remain important determinants of income per
person.

But the small share of land in national income is plausibly the result of the
fact that the income gains of the Industrial Revolution ceased to be translated
into more surviving children and instead went into material consumption.
Demography is now unimportant in such societies as England or the United
States because of reductions in fertility. Following the Industrial Revolution
events could have led to another possible world—one in which technological
advances resulted in larger and larger populations, depleting the world’s re-
source base and eventually choking off the growth in income per person.

Figure 14.6 shows the course of the so-called demographic transition in
England. The figure shows two measures of fertility. The first is the gross re-
production rate (GRR), the average number of daughters born to a woman
who lived through the full reproductive span, by decade. Since there were
roughly as many sons as daughters born, such a woman would have given birth
to nearly five children all the way from the 1540s to the 1890s. Since in England
10–20 percent of each female cohort remained celibate, for married women the

socal c os Q U cs  289


4

Demographic
transition

3

GRR

GRR

2

NRR

1

0

1540   1590   1640   1690   1740   1790   1840   1890   1940   1990

Figure 4.6 English fertility history, 1540–2000. Data from Wrigley et al., 1997, 614, and United
Kingdom Office of National Statistics.

average number of births was close to six. The demographic transition to mod-
ern fertility rates began only in the 1890s and then progressed rapidly. By
2000 English women gave birth on average to less than two children. This
transition in England was similar in timing to that across a whole range of
European countries at the end of the nineteenth century.

The second measure of fertility is the net reproduction rate (NRR), the
average number of daughters that would be born though her lifetime by the
average female born in each decade. If the NRR is 1, then each female born
merely replaces herself over the course of a lifetime (having two children on
average). Net reproduction rates fell much less. Indeed for the average pre-
industrial society the NRR would be much closer to 1 than in prosperous
preindustrial England in the years 1540–1800. So the decline in NRR with the
arrival   of the modern world has been minimal. As we saw in the previous
chapter the GRR and NRR both rose in the era of the classic Industrial Rev-
olution in England.

What triggered the switch to the modern demographic regime with few
children despite high incomes? In particular, was this another independent

290  chat R 4 


innovation, as significant for human history as the Industrial Revolution? Or
was it just a delayed echo of the earlier Industrial Revolution?

The first possibility is that the general rise of incomes reduced fertility.
The decline in gross fertility, the number of children born to women, is
clearly correlated with income, both across societies and within particular so-
cieties over time. This fact has led some economists, such as Gary Becker,
to posit that the driving force in declining fertility was just the great gain in
incomes since the Industrial Revolution.24 That would make the demographic
transition a mere echo of the Industrial Revolution, another consequence of
the technological break from the Malthusian regime.

But if people have fewer children as incomes rise, it implies that children,
in economic terms, are “inferior” goods, in the same category as potatoes. Why
do people want more housing space, more cars, and more clothes as they get
richer, but not more children? Becker argued that the demand for children
can be analyzed as one would the demand for any commodity, as long as we
are careful to note that there are two constraints on consumption. The first is
the budget constraint: how much a person has to spend. The second is the
time constraint: there are only 24 hours in each day within which to consume
things. As incomes have risen and the budget constraint has relaxed, the time
constraint on consumption has become ever more important. Richer con-
sumers switched their consumption patterns away from time-intensive activ-
ities toward goods that require less time to consume. As people get richer they
tend to buy many time-saving products and services, such as prepared foods
and restaurant meals.

Children as a consumption item are time intensive in the extreme. Thus
higher-income consumers have switched their consumption away from chil-
dren to less time-intensive goods: expensive homes, fancy cars, nice clothes.
But since time constrains rich people to have few children, there has also been
a switch toward having children of higher “quality.” Time constraints mean
that millionaires do not get to drive any more than fast-food workers. But the
rich consume more car services by riding in expensive new Porsches and
BMWs, while the poor make do with Hyundais. Parents whom time con-
strains to only a few children want the best possible children that money can
buy, so they invest in enrichment programs, orthodontists, private schools,
athletic camps, ceramics classes. The rich are having fewer children than the

24. Becker, 1981.

socal c os Q U cs   29


Table 4.5 Children Born per Married Man in England,

1891–1911

Occupation         1891     1901     1911

Professional         4.9     4.7     3.8

Miner            6.7      6.5      5.9

Construction laborer     6.4      5.6      5.4

General laborer        6.4     6.4     5.2

Agricultural laborer      6.6     5.9     4.9

Source: Garrett et al., 2001, 291, 297.

poor only if we count children by heads. If we count by expenditures richer
parents still spend much more on their children than the poor. Figure 14.3, for
example, which showed the hourly real wage of English building workers from
1200  to 2000, reveals that real income gains were actually modest until after
the 1860s. Thus the delay in the decline in fertility until long after the onset
of the Industrial Revolution would be explicable if income drives fertility.
Similarly in the modern world there is a strong negative relationship between
gross fertility and income across countries.

We also see in late-nineteenth-century England during the demographic
transition a negative association between income and numbers of children
born. Table 14.5 shows for 1891, 1901, and 1911 the estimated numbers of chil-
dren present in households by the occupation of the male household head.
The numbers of children born in 1891 were unchanged from the preindustrial
era for low-income groups, but they had already fallen for the professional
classes. In all the cross sections the high-income group had lower gross fertil-
ity, even as by 1911 the gross numbers of children begin to fall for the poorest
groups.

Income, however, certainly cannot by itself explain the modern decline
in fertility. For we have already seen for the preindustrial period that net re-
production rates were positively associated with income. The male testators
in England in 1585–1638, with wealth that would make them rich even by the
standards of 1891, left nearly four children each. Their gross fertilities would
be   as high as those for the working classes in England in the 1890s. Figure 14.7
shows surviving children as a function of wealth even up to those with assets
of £1,500 or more (averaging £2,600). These assets would produce an income

292  chat R 4 


6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0-9    10-24   25-49   50-99   100-249  250-499  500-999  1,000-1,499 1,500+

Assets at death (£)

Figure 4.7 Surviving children as a function of wealth in England, circa 1620. The bands for
each wealth class show the range of values within which we can be 95 percent confident that the
true numbers of surviving children per testator lay.

equivalent to about £260 a year in 1891, well above the annual earnings of
about £80 per year for building craftsmen or £50 for laborers in this period.
Had income alone been determining fertility, the rich in the preindustrial
world would already have been restricting their fertility.

Could the rich of the preindustrial world actually have wanted fewer chil-
dren, but been unable to achieve that desire because of a lack of effective
contraception? No. Figure 14.6 shows that most of the decline toward levels
of    gross fertility characteristic of modern developed economies had been ac-
complished in England (and indeed elsewhere in Europe) by the 1920s, long
before modern condoms, hormonal contraceptive pills, legalized abortion, or
vasectomies.

Using only abstinence, withdrawal, and more primitive barrier methods,
technologies available in England at least as early as the seventeenth century,
birth   rates for married women by the 1920s were reduced to less than half
their previous levels. And this happened in a social environment in which
birth control was rarely discussed in public forums. Even more persuasively,

socal c os Q U cs   293


in the late eighteenth century the French began to reduce their fertility rates
within marriage. By the 1850s they already had fertility levels equivalent to
those of England in 1901. Thus the possibility of controlling fertility existed
long before the demographic transition of the late nineteenth century. The
lack of fertility control before then was an issue more of motivation than of
means.

Another indication that income alone cannot explain fertility declines is
the lack of any association in modern high-income economies between in-
come and fertility. For example, for both 1980 and 2000 there was no link
between household income and fertility, measured as the numbers of children
present in the households of married women aged 30–42, for Canada, Fin-
land, Germany, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States.25 It is
only in the course of the demographic transition that we observe a negative
relationship between income and fertility across income groups in a society.

An alternative possibility is that the desired number of children per mar-
ried couple is actually independent of income, and that the preference was
always for only two or three surviving children. But to achieve a completed
family size of even two children in the high-mortality environment of the
Malthusian era required five or more births.

Furthermore, the random nature of child deaths meant that, in order to
ensure a reasonably good chance of a surviving son, average family sizes had
to  be large. Figure 14.8 shows the distribution of the numbers of surviving
sons for men leaving wills in England between 1585 and 1638. Nearly 40 per-
cent of the poorest married men leaving wills had no surviving son. Even
among the richest married men nearly one-fifth left no son. The average rich
man left four children because some families had large numbers of surviving
children. Hence the absence of any sign of fertility control by richer families
in preindustrial England may stem more from the uncertainties of child sur-
vival in the Malthusian era. With a greater fraction of child deaths the variance
of resulting family sizes at an average completed family size of two children
would necessarily be greater. As the fraction of children surviving increased,
risk-averse families could afford to begin limiting births.

In the late nineteenth century child mortality in England had fallen sub-
stantially from the levels of the eighteenth century, and the rate of that decline
was strongly correlated with income. For families living in homes with ten or

25. Dickmann, 2003, table 2.

294  chat R 4 


50

40                                        Poor

Rich

30

20

10

0

0       1       2       3       4       5      6+

Surviving sons

Figure 4.8 Percentage of men with particular numbers of sons, England, 1585–1638.

more rooms only 13 percent of children failed to reach age 15, while for those
living in one room 47 percent of children failed to reach that age.26 Thus the
lower gross fertility of high-income groups at the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury portrayed in table 14.5 translates into a more muted decline in net fer-
tility among higher-income groups. And these groups faced a substantially
reduced variance in family size outcomes compared to low-income groups.

Another possible element in the decline of fertility since the Industrial
Revolution is the increased social status of women. Men may well have had
greater desire for children in preindustrial society than women. Women, not
men, bore the very real health risks of pregnancy, and they did most of the
child rearing. But typically men had a much more powerful position within
the family. Thus women may always have desired smaller numbers of surviv-
ing children than men but only been able to act on those desires as of the late
nineteenth century.

Women’s relative status and voice were clearly increasing in the late nine-
teenth century in England. Literacy rates for women had by then advanced to

26. Haines, 1995, 303.

socal c os Q U cs   295


near equality with those of men. Women had gained access to universities by
1869, enhanced property rights within marriage by 1882, the right to vote in
local elections by 1894, and finally a vote in national elections by 1918. These
gains proceeded most rapidly among higher-income groups.

These assumptions could explain why net fertility falls after the late nine-
teenth century even though in cross section in the sixteenth century and in
2000 there is either a positive connection between income and net fertility
or no connection. They could also explain why the demographic transition
appeared first in the higher socioeconomic groups, so that net fertility is neg-
atively related to income during the transition period.

Why Did Owners of Capital Not Gain More?

Chapters 10 and 11 showed why from the Industrial Revolution onward in-
novators have generally collected little of the productivity advances their
innovations produced. The returns to capital employed in industrial produc-
tion have often exceeded the competitive market return on capital. But the
presence of these higher returns seems to owe more to the ability of some firms
to create barriers to entry to their sectors than to rapid productivity growth
in the sectors. These entry barriers generally have little to do with techno-
logical advances. They owe more to factors such as increasing returns to scale
or the ability to create brand images through advertising.

Productivity growth in cotton textiles in England from 1770 to 1870, for
example, far exceeded that in any other industry. But the competitive nature
of the industry, and the inability of the patent system to protect most tech-
nological advances, kept profits low. Cotton goods were homogenous. Yarn and
cloth were sold in wholesale markets where quality differences were readily
evident to buyers. The efficient scale of cotton spinning and weaving mills
was always small relative to the market. New entrants abounded. By 1900
Britain had about two thousand firms in the industry. Firms learned im-
proved techniques from innovative competitors by hiring away their skilled
workers. Machine designers learned improved techniques from operating firms.
The entire industry—the capital goods makers and the product producers—
over time clustered more and more tightly in the Manchester area. By 1900
40 percent of the entire world output of cotton goods was produced within
30 miles of Manchester. The main beneficiaries of this technological advance

296  chat R 4 


thus ended up being consumers of textiles across the world and landowners
in the cluster of textile towns, whose largely worthless agricultural land be-
came valuable building sites.

The greatest of the Industrial Revolution cotton magnates, Richard Ark-
wright, is estimated to have left £0.5 million when he died in 1792.27 His son,
also named Richard, inherited his father’s spinning mills. But though Richard
the son had managed his own mills and had much experience in the business,
and though the industry itself was still showing rapid productivity growth, he
soon sold most of his father’s mills, preferring to invest in land and govern-
ment bonds. By 1814 he owned £0.5 million in government bonds alone. He
prospered mainly from those bonds and from real estate, leaving £3.25 million
when  he died in 1843, despite having sunk a substantial sum into a palatial
country house for his family.28 But Arkwright Senior accumulated less wealth
than Josiah Wedgwood, who left £0.6 million in 1795, even though Wedg-
wood operated in a sector, pottery, which had seen far less technological
progress and was still largely dependent on manual labor even in the late
nineteenth century.

Though the first wave of great innovations of the Industrial Revolution,
in textiles, did not offer above-average profits because of the competitive
nature of the industry, the second wave, in railroads, seemed to offer more
possibilities. Railways are a technology with inherent economies of scale. To
begin with, one line has to be built between two cities, and once it has been
built a competitor wishing to enter the market can do so only by building,
at a minimum, a complete line of its own. Since most city pairs could not
profitably support multiple links, exclusion, hence profits, seemed possible.

The success of the Liverpool-Manchester line in 1830—by the 1840s
equity shares in this line were selling for twice their par value—inspired a
long period of investment in railways. Figure 14.9 shows the rapid growth of
the railway network in England from 1825 to 1869, by which time more than
12,000 miles of track had been laid across the relatively small country. The
pace of investment and construction was so frenetic that economic historians
speak of “railway manias” in 1839 and 1846. Railways absorbed a large fraction
of all fixed capital investment in England in the mid-nineteenth century.

27. Fitton, 1989, 219.

28. Ibid., 296.

socal c os Q U cs  297


14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000


6,000

Railway manias

4,000

2,000

0

1824        1834        1844        1854        1864

Figure 4.9 British railroad construction, 1825–67. Data from Mitchell and Deane, 1971, 225.

But again the rush to enter quickly drove down profits to very modest
levels, as table 14.6 shows. Even in the first decade of railway construction the
profit rate on the capital invested was modest. By the 1860s real returns, the
return on the capital actually invested, were no greater than for very safe in-
vestments in government bonds or agricultural land. While railway lines had
local monopolies, they ended up in constant competition with each other
through roundabout routes.

Thus while, for example, the Great Western line may have controlled the
route from London to Manchester, freight and passengers could cross over
through other companies to link up with the East Coast route to London.
Once more profits inspired imitation and the high returns were squeezed out
of the system. Consumers were again the main beneficiaries.

It is for this reason that in Britain, unlike in the United States, there are
very few universities and major charities funded by private donors. The Indus-
trial Revolution did not result in great personal or family fortunes in England.
By the 1860s the rich were still by and large the descendants of the landed
aristocracy. Of 379 men dying between 1860 and 1879 in Britain who left at
least  £0.5 million, 256 (68 percent) owed their wealth to inherited land. As
we saw in chapter 11, only 17 (4 percent) were textile magnates, even though

298  chat R 4 


Table 4.6 Profit Rates on the Capital Invested in British-Owned Railways,

1830–1912

Rate of return,     Rate of return,    Rate of return,
United Kingdom    British Empire      foreign

Period         (%)           (%)          (%)

1830–39        3.9           —           —

1840–49        4.8           —           —

1850–59        3.8           —           —

1860–69        3.8           —           4.7

1870–79        3.2           —           8.0

1880–89        3.3           1.4          7.7

1890–99        3.0           2.5          4.9

1900–09        2.6           1.6          4.4

1910–12        2.6           3.1          6.6

Sources: Before 1860: Arnold and McCartney, 2005, table 2. After 1860: Davis and Hutten-
back, 1986, table 3.8.

the textile industry had driven the productivity advance of the Industrial
Revolution.29

Thus the lack of any inherent connection between more rapid techno-
logical advance and the generation of above-average profits by firms, with con-
sumers instead reaping most of the benefits of technological advance, further
explains the equalizing tendencies of growth since the Industrial Revolution.
Within societies the forces set in motion by the Industrial Revolution have
moved toward equality and social harmony. But across societies, as we shall see
in  the next part of the book, the Industrial Revolution led to a marked in-
crease in income differences. Before the Industrial Revolution the rich and the
poor were close neighbors. Now they are but distant cousins, gazing at each

other across national borders and widening income gaps.

29. Rubinstein, 1981, 60–67.

socal c os Q U cs  299



PART III 

The Great Divergence



5  World Growth since 8

The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by
the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most
barbarian, nations into civilization. The cheap prices of commodities are the
heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces
the barbarians’ intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels
all nations, on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it
compels them to introduce what it calls civilization into their midst, i.e., to be-
come bourgeois themselves. In one word, it creates a world after its own image.

—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (1848)1

By the mid-nineteenth century the efficiency of the English economy was
clearly growing at an unprecedented pace. That this improvement in effi-
ciency was based on knowledge creation, rather than the accumulation of
physical capital or the exploitation of natural resources, seemed to imply the
rapid worldwide spread of the techniques and industries of the Industrial
Revolution. For while developing knowledge is an arduous task, copying the
inventions of others can be easy.

The increasing prosperity and economic power of Britain impressed both
foreign governments and individuals, especially since it was accompanied by
growing military and political power. Thus there were soon both private
and governmental attempts to import the new British technologies. A series
of eighteenth-century Parliamentary Acts restricted the emigration of artisans
and the export of machinery, plans, or models in the textile and other indus-
tries. Only after 1825 were artisans free to work abroad, and only after 1842
were machinery exports deregulated.2 But England still swarmed with foreign
dignitaries, industrial spies, adventurers, and prospective manufacturers doing
the rounds of its mills, foundries, factories, mines, and railways. Skilled work-
ers were regularly propositioned with the promise of riches abroad. Despite
the difficulties of travel and the language and cultural barriers, thousands

1. Marx and Engels, 1967, 84.

2. Henderson, 1965, 4, 139–41.

303


Table 5. Time Lags in the International Diffusion of Innovations

Cotton mill   Watt-type steam engine   Steam railway
Country      (1771)        (1775)        (1825)

Austria         30           42            13

Belgium        28           16            10

Brazil          75           35            29

Canada         —           36            11

Denmark        —           29           19

France          7            3            7

Germany        13            8           12

Hungary        —           28           21

India          46           30            28

Ireland         19           15            9

Italy          —           12            14

Mexico         64           43            48

Netherlands       24           10           14

Portugal        —           28           31

Russia          22           23            11

Spain          —            7            23

Switzerland       23           49           22

Sweden         —           23           30

United States      20           28            5

Sources: Cotton mill: Clark, 1987a. Watt engine: Robinson, 1974; Tann and Breckin, 1978.
Steam railway: Mitchell, 1995, 1998a, 1998b.

Note: The table gives the time to the first use found by a survey of the literature. More rapid
adoption is possible.

responded.3 King Canute probably had as much success in holding back the
tide as did British governments in protecting trade secrets during the Indus-
trial Revolution.

Table 15.1 quantifies the rapidity of the spread of cotton mills, Watt-type
steam engines, and steam railways to other countries. The table shows the
time in years between the introduction of the new technique in England and
its first known use in other countries. Clearly there was a diffusion lag. For
western European countries it was on the order of thirteen years; for eastern

3. It was estimated that by 1824 there were 1,400 British artisans in France alone; Hen-
derson, 1965, 141f.

304  chat R 5 


and southern Europe, more like twenty-two years; India, thirty-five years;
Latin America, fifty-two years. Such lags would translate into moderate dif-
ferences in the efficiency levels of economies. But at the rates of efficiency ad-
vance for England during the Industrial Revolution, even a county such as In-
dia would have an income per person only 17 percent less than that in
England as a result of the delay in acquiring the most up-to-date techniques.
But  in the nineteenth century technological advance was particularly
strong in techniques that determined the speed of travel of information and
the cost of shipment for goods. Thus there was every hope that by the late
nineteenth century the world would be sufficiently globalized that diffusion
lags would drop rapidly, and industrialization would proceed in even the

poorest countries.

The Instruments of Globalization

In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries a series of technological,
organizational, and political developments seemed to imply the coming inte-
gration   of all countries into a new industrialized world.

The technological changes were the development of railways, steamships,
the telegraph, and the mechanized factory. The organizational change was the
development of specialized machine-building firms in Britain, and later the
United States, whose business was the export of technology. The political
changes were the extension of European colonial empires to large parts of
Africa and Asia, and internal political developments within Europe.

The world before 1800 was one in which information and people traveled
at astonishingly slow speeds. We have a nice example of the speed of infor-
mation flow for the later Roman Empire from the work of Richard Duncan-
Jones. Legal documents in Roman Egypt under the empire listed both the
calendar date and the name of the reigning emperor. When a new emperor
came  to power in Rome there was thus a period when legal documents in
Egypt carried the name of the previous emperor. The length of this period in-
dicates how long it took information to get to Egypt.4 The estimated average
transmittal time, shown in table 15.2, was 56 days. Thus along the major trade

4. Since few documents survive for each transition between emperors, the first document
with the correct name of an emperor provides just an upper bound on the transmittal time.
Similarly the last document with the wrong name gives a lower bound. The mean of these two
estimates gives an unbiased estimate of the true transmittal time.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   305


Table 5.2

Speed of Information Travel in the Mediterranean

Distance               Speed

Period    Journey         (miles)    Days   Journeys   (mph)
54–222   Italy-Egypt       1,323     56      23     1.0

1500     Damascus-Venice    1,514     80      56     0.8

Alexandria-Venice    1,366    65     266     0.9

Lisbon-Venice      1,189     46      35     1.1

Palermo-Venice      507    22     118     1.0

Source: Duncan-Jones, 1990, 7–29.

Note: Distances are calculated along the great circle.

routes of the Roman Empire information flowed at an average speed of 1 mile
per hour.

We also have estimates of travel speeds in the Mediterranean circa 1500
from the diaries of Venetians. These show the days between events occurring
elsewhere and a report of them appearing in a Venetian diary. The speed of
information travel is very similar to that in Imperial Roman times.

Thus in the Malthusian era people lived in a world where information
spread so slowly that many died fighting over issues that had already been
decided. The Battle of New Orleans, fought on January 8, 1815, between the
British and the Americans, which resulted in a thousand deaths, occurred
because neither commander knew that the Treaty of Ghent had concluded
a peace between the countries on December 24. The British commander, who
then moved on to take Biloxi, heard the news only on February 14.

Information flows were not much faster in 1800 than in the classical
world. The Times of London reported Nelson’s triumph at the Battle of the
Nile on August 1, 1798, only on October 2, 62 days later: the news traveled
at 1.4 miles per hour. Nelson’s victory over the French and his glorious death at
Trafalgar, off the Portuguese coast, on October 21, 1805, was first reported in
the Times 17 days later: a transmission speed of 2.7 miles per hour. Table 15.3
gives a sampling of how long it took news of events elsewhere in the world in
the nineteenth century to reach the Times of London. By the early nineteenth
century information flowed at somewhat faster rates than in the classical and
medieval worlds. Nevertheless news could still take six months to reach Britain
from India.

306  chat R 5 


Table 5.3 Speed of Information Travel to London, 1798–1914

Days

Distance  until  Speed

Event                    Year   (miles)   report  (mph)

Battle of the Nile               1798   2,073   62     1.4

Battle of Trafalgar              1805   1,100   17     2.7

Earthquake, Kutch, India          1819   4,118   153    1.1

Treaty of Nanking              1842   5,597   84     2.8

Charge of the Light Brigade, Crimea     1854   1,646   17     4.0

Indian Mutiny, Delhi Massacre        1857   4,176   46    3.8

Treaty of Tien-Sin (China)          1858   5,140   82     2.6

Assassination of Lincoln           1865   3,674   13    12

Assassination of Archduke Maximilian,    1867   5,545   12    19

Mexico

Assassination of Alexander II, St. Petersburg  1881   1,309    0.46  119

Nobi Earthquake, Japan           1891   5,916    1   246

Note: Distances are calculated along the great circle.

In the mid-nineteenth century the introduction of the telegraph in
1844, and particularly the laying of the first undersea telegraph cable between
France and England in 1851, changed by a factor of nearly 100 the speed of
travel of information. In 1866 transatlantic telegraph service was established.5
By 1870 India was linked to Britain by a telegraph system, partly over land and
partly undersea, which could transmit messages in twenty-four hours. This
explains the explosion in the speed of information transmission in table 15.3
between 1858 and 1891.

The cost of carriage for goods also declined dramatically in the nineteenth
century, both on land and across the sea. Table 15.4 shows the miles of railroad
completed in selected countries by 1850, 1890, and 1910. The great expansion
of   the rail network in the late nineteenth century, even in countries otherwise
little affected by the Industrial Revolution, such as Russia and India, im-
proved communication immensely.

Ocean transport was similarly revolutionized in this period by the devel-
opment of faster and more cost-effective steamships. By the 1830s steamships

5. A cable laid in 1858 had failed.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   307


Table 5.4 Railway Mileage Completed (thousands
of miles)

1850    1890    1910

Britain        6.1      17      20

United States     9.0     208     352

Germany       3.6      27      38

France        1.8      21      25

Russia         0.3      19      41

India         0.0      17      33

Sources: Mitchell, 1995, 1998a, 1998b.

were already speedier and more reliable than sailing ships, but they were used
only for the most valuable and urgent freight, such as mail. Their high coal
consumption limited the amount of cargo they could carry. To sail from
Bombay  to Aden in 1830 the Hugh Lindsay “had to fill its hold and cabins and
pile its decks with coal, barely leaving enough room for the crew and the
mail.” In the 1840s the liner Britannia required 640 tons of coal to cross the
Atlantic with 225 tons of cargo. Thus even in the 1850s steam power was used
only for perishable cargos, and even then only on certain routes.6

But in the 1850s and 1860s four innovations lowered the cost of steam-
powered ocean transport: the screw propeller, iron hulls, compound engines,
and surface condensers. Screw propellers translated power into motion through
the water more effectively. Iron-hulled ships were 30–40 percent lighter and
offered 15 percent more cargo capacity for a given amount of steam power.
Compound engines converted coal into mechanical power more efficiently.
Surface condensers conserved water (ocean steamships had previously had
to make steam from seawater, which led to corrosion and fouling of their
engines).

These last two innovations greatly reduced the coal consumption of en-
gines per horsepower-hour. In the 1830s it took 10 pounds of coal to produce
one horsepower-hour, but by 1881 the amount was down to 2 pounds. This
advance not only reduced costs directly but also allowed ships to carry less
coal and more cargo, thus further reducing them.7

6. Headrick, 1988, 24.

7. Headrick, 1988, 24–31.

308  chat R 5 


Steamship speeds also increased. On the Atlantic the Great Western in
1838 had a maximum speed of 10 miles per hour. By 1907 the Mauretania could
make 29 miles per hour.8

Finally the completion of the Suez Canal in 1869 and the Panama Canal
in 1914 greatly reduced distances on some of the major ocean routes. The Suez
Canal reduced the length of the journey from London to Bombay by 41 per-
cent, and that from London to Shanghai by 32 percent, thus bringing the
markets of Europe and Asia substantially closer.

The result of these technological changes was a significant decline in real
ocean transport costs by 1900. In 1907, for example, it cost £0.40 to carry a
volume ton of cotton goods by rail the 30 miles from Manchester to Liverpool,
but only £0.90–1.50 more to ship those goods the 7,250 miles from Liverpool
to Bombay.9 Since a volume ton of cotton textiles at that time would have a
value of about £80, these costs represented a mere 2 percent of the value of
the product.10 In comparison the rate for cotton goods carried from Bombay
to London by the East India Company in 1793 was £31 per ton.11 In terms of
day wages shipping costs to the East by 1906 were only 2 percent of the level
of 1793. Much of this decline in cost, however, had been achieved by the
1840s, with sailing vessels and well before the Suez Canal opened. In the 1840s
it cost £3.60 to ship a volume ton of goods from Calcutta to England.12

By the late nineteenth century industrial locations with good water access
that were on well-established shipping routes—Bombay, Calcutta, Madras,
Shanghai, Hong Kong—could gain access to all the industrial inputs of Britain
at  costs not too much higher than those of many firms in Britain. Table 15.5
shows shipping costs per ton for cotton goods from English ports to various
destinations in 1907. By 1907 production of goods like cotton textiles was fea-
sible anywhere in the world close to an ocean port.

Figure 15.1 shows the costs of another important industrial input, energy,
measured as coal costs at various ports around the world, standardized to the
price  of Welsh steaming coal. The low shipping costs meant that British coal

8. Kirkaldy, 1914, appendix XVIII.

9. A volume ton is equal to 50 cubic feet. For cotton textiles a volume ton weighed 1,344

pounds.

10. Deane and Cole, 1967, 187.

11. MacGregor, 1850, 389. It is not clear if this was a weight or volume ton.

12. McGregor, 1850, 917. O’Rourke and Williamson, 2002a, 2002b, argue that from 1500
to 1800 declines in transport costs between Asia and Europe were minimal, the gains in trade
volume being largely a function of increased European demand.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   309


Table 5.5 Transport Costs for Cotton Goods from England, 1907

Ocean distance  Cost per 40 cubic feet

Origin     Destination         (miles)         (£)

Manchester   Bombay           6,851         0.93

Manchester   Calcutta           8,751         1.50

Birkenhead   Shanghai         11,676         1.66

Birkenhead   Japan           12,461         1.66

Manchester   Buenos Ares         6,844         1.75

Liverpool    Sydney          12,366         1.78

Liverpool    Java             9,441         1.88

Birkenhead   Manila           10,667         2.08

Liverpool    Cape Town         6,663         2.12

England    Lagos            4,199         2.25

Manchester   Limon (Costa Rica)     5,337         2.38

England    Valparaiso          8,060         2.50

Manchester   Rio de Janeiro        5,577         3.25

Sources: Transport costs: Parliamentary Papers, 1909a. Distances between ports: United States,
Naval Oceanographic Office, 1965.

2.5


2.0

Buenos Aires


1.5

1.0

0.5

England

Alexandria

Charleston

Colombo

Bombay

Natal

Shanghai

Yokohama
Melbourne

British coal
Local coal

0.0

0     2,000     4,000     6,000     8,000    10,000    12,000    14,000

Distance from Cardiff (miles)

Figure 5. Steam coal costs at world ports, 1907. Data from Parliamentary Papers, 1909a.


was available in a surprising range of ports across the world. The dark squares
in the figure show places where British coal was available. In 1907 steamers
at such distant locations as Singapore, Colombo, Alexandria, Buenos Aires,
and Istanbul could fuel using English coal. Coal costs were higher in many
countries than in northern Europe and the United States, but the range of
costs for such a heavy material, found in such uneven distribution across the
world, was remarkably small: little more than 2:1.

The last of the great technological changes of the nineteenth century was
the introduction of the mechanized factory. Industrial production before the
Industrial Revolution was generally directed by many skilled artisans who
learned their crafts through personal apprenticeships. In the preindustrial pe-
riod when countries wanted to develop new industries they generally had to
recruit whole communities of foreign artisans. The French in the 1660s even
went so far as to abduct a group of Swedish iron workers in hopes of having
them establish an iron industry.13

The textile industry during the Industrial Revolution was revolutionary
in its rate of productivity advance. But it was also revolutionary in its ability
to employ, with minimal skilled supervision, large numbers of unskilled,
untrained, short-term workers. The replacement of skilled lifetime workers
by cheaper forms of labor did not occur all at once, and it was not com-
pletely possible until the development of the ring spindle in the late nine-
teenth century. But all through the nineteenth century adult males, tradition-
ally the most expensive and intractable form of labor, accounted for less than
30 percent of cotton textile operators, even in Britain, where skill-intensive
mule spinning predominated.14 By the late 1930s, for example, when the
Japanese cotton spinning industry had labor productivity levels not much
below those of Britain, the labor force in Japan was 88.5 percent female, and
the average female cotton operator was 17 years old with 2.3 years experience
in the industry.15

The ability of the textile industry to keep operator skills, education, and
supervision requirements to a minimum is well illustrated by ring spinning.
This was a spinning technique, developed in the nineteenth century, which

13. Cipolla, 1972, 50–51.

14. Deane and Cole, 1967, 190.

15. Shindo, 1961, 233–36.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   3


succeeded in part because it minimized necessary worker skills. Ring spinning
operators needed to perform only the following five tasks:

1. Piecing. Twisting together the broken pieces of thread when a break
occurs.

2. Creeling. Replacing the bobbins that supply the unspun cotton to
the ring spindle.

3. Cleaning. Wiping away tufts of loose cotton fibers which accumulate
on the spinning frames.

4. Doffing. Removing the full bobbins of spun yarn and replacing them
with empty bobbins. This is normally done at regular planned inter-
vals by specialized squads of doffers.

5. Patrolling. Walking around the machines inspecting for spindles in

need of tasks 1–3.

Work organization was extremely simple. Each spinner ( piecer in India)
was assigned a set of spindles. During a shift the spinner walked around the
set of spindles on the same path. Each spindle was inspected to see if it
needed piecing, creeling, or cleaning. If so the task was performed. Spinners
needed no literacy, nor even particular strength or dexterity. Nor did they need
to plan ahead. They merely proceeded from spindle to spindle doing which-
ever of the three tasks was necessary.

The foreman could check if operators had been diligent simply by peri-
odically counting how many of the spindles under their care were stopped (in
the terminology of the industry, how many ends were down) and comparing
that with the rate for other operators.

Most of the tasks in other parts of the spinning industry had exactly the
same character. It was for these reasons that the textile industry was hailed by
some, and reviled by others, as the precursor of a new industrial order in which
work would be machine regulated and machine paced.

Thus while the sophistication of technology was increasing after the In-
dustrial Revolution, for many production processes the tasks, by design, were
simplified and routinized. Technology might be designed by those countries
with  high levels of education, but much of its operation was well suited to
poor economies such as India and China.

Added to the various technological ways in which world industrialization
was hastened were organizational changes that facilitated the diffusion of
technologies.

32  chat R 5 


In the early nineteenth century the heroic age of innovation by the lone
inventor ended, and a specialized machine-building sector developed within
the Lancashire cotton industry. These firms played an important role in ex-
porting textile technology. As the rate of growth of the English industry slowed
in the late nineteenth century, British manufacturers looked abroad for mar-
kets. The textile machinery maker Platt Brothers, for example, was exporting
at least 50 percent of its production as early as 1845–70. Such capital goods
firms were able to provide a complete package of services to prospective for-
eign entrants into the textile industry, including technical information, ma-
chinery, construction expertise, and managers and skilled operators. By 1913
the six largest textile machine producers employed over thirty thousand
workers mainly producing for the world market.16 These firms reduced the
risks to foreign entrepreneurs by selling machines on a trial basis and sup-
plying skilled workers to direct operations and train local labor forces.

Table 15.6 shows a sample of the number of orders Platt took for ring-
spinning frames, where each order typically involved multiple machines, in the
periods 1890–1914 and 1915–1936. England was a small share of Platt’s market
for ring frames throughout these years.

Similar capital goods exporters developed in the railway sector, and later
in the United States in the boot and shoe industry. British construction crews
completed railways in many foreign countries under the captainship of such
flamboyant entrepreneurs as Lord Thomas Brassey.17 The overseas exodus
was  due in part to the saturation of the rail market within Britain by the
1870s. By 1875, in a railway construction boom lasting just forty-five years,
71 percent of all the railway lines ever constructed in Britain had been com-
pleted. As table 15.4 suggests, thereafter the major markets for British rail con-
tractors and engine constructors were overseas. India, for example, got most
of  its railway equipment from Britain, and Indian railway mileage by 1910 was
significantly greater than that of Britain.

The final set of developments in the nineteenth century that should have
speeded world industrialization was political. The most important of these
was  the expansion of European colonial territories. By 1900 the European
states controlled as colonies 35 percent of the land surface of the world, even

16. Bruland, 1989, 5, 6, 34.

17. Brassey built railways in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Britain, Canada, Denmark,
France, India, Italy, Mauritius, the Netherlands, Poland, Prussia, Russia, and Spain; Helps, 1874,
161–66.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   33


Table 5.6 Platt Ring Frame Orders by Country, 1890–1936

Country           Sales, 1890–1914     Sales, 1915–1936

Austria/Hungary           4             4

Belgium/Netherlands         24            17

Brazil                95            43

Canada               15            17

Central America            3            1

China                 5            64

Czechoslovakia            14            10

Egypt                 0             5

England              110            74

France                41            31

Germany              47             6

India                66           132

Italy                 69            29

Japan                66           117

Mexico                75             7

Peru                  7             0

Poland                41             8

Portugal/Spain           103            35

Russia               131            23

Scandinavia              4             0

Switzerland              3             0

Turkey                0             6

United States             2             0

West Africa              0             2

Source: Lancashire Record Office, Platt Ring Frame Order Books. Data from nine
years in each period.

excluding Asiatic Russia. Of a world area of 58 million square miles Europe
itself constitutes only 4 million square miles, but by 1900 its dependencies
covered 20 million square miles. The British Empire was the largest, covering
9 million square miles. The French had nearly 5 million square miles; the
Netherlands, 2 million square miles; and Germany, 1 million square miles.

Even many countries that formally remained independent were forced
to cede trading privileges and special rights to European powers. Thus at the
conclusion of the First Opium War in 1842 China, by the Treaty of Nanjing,
was forced to allow European imports, including opium, at low tariff rates, to

34  chat R 5 


allow foreign residence in treaty ports such as Shanghai, and to concede Hong
Kong to the British. Further conflicts resulted in more Chinese defeats, and
the creation of what was essentially an international city in Shanghai.

Despite its many unpleasant aspects, imperialism would seem to have
been a potent driving force for world industrialization. Foreign entrepreneurs
investing in independent countries always faced the danger of expropriation
if  local political conditions changed. By the late nineteenth century the po-
litical control by countries such as Britain of so much of the world allowed
European entrepreneurs to export machinery and techniques to low-wage areas
with little risk of expropriation.

The most important colonial empire was that of the British, whose ma-
jor possessions by the end of the nineteenth century included most of India,
Pakistan, Burma, Sri Lanka, South Africa, and Egypt. The nature of British
imperialism also ensured that, up until 1918, no country was restrained from
the development of industry by the absence of a local market of sufficient
size. Because of the British policy of free trade Britain itself and most British
dependencies were open to imports, either with no tariffs or else with low
tariffs intended solely to raise revenue.

In cotton textiles, the major manufacturing industry of the world before
1918, table 15.7 shows the major net exporters and importers of cotton yarn and
cloth in the international market of 1910. India, the largest market, was served
almost exclusively by English mills, but was in fact open to all countries, the
only barrier being a 3.5 percent revenue tariff on imports. Even this impedi-
ment had been balanced by a countervailing tax applied to local Indian mills,
at the insistence of Manchester manufacturers. The Chinese market, the next
largest, by fiat of the imperial powers was similarly protected by only a 5 per-
cent ad valorem revenue tariff. Australia also maintained an ad valorem tariff
of only 5 percent, having no domestic industry to protect.

Thus in 1910 the total size of the open cotton textile market was on the
order of $400 million, a quarter of world production. This market would be
enough to sustain 35 million spindles and 400,000 looms. In 1910 the British
textile industry, the largest in the world, had 55 million spindles and 650,000
looms in operation, since the British also sold in protected foreign markets.
Thus by the early twentieth century 40 percent of the world cotton textile
market was available to any entrant on the same terms as for British mills.
The pre–World War I Pax Britannica was also a major element in reduc-

ing transport costs on the oceans. Prior to the nineteenth century shipping

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   35


Table 5.7 Net Exports of Cotton Yarn and Cloth, 1910 (millions of dollars)
Country       All  Yarn, thread  Gray woven cloth  Colored cloth

Major exporters

United Kingdom   453     83        100        270

Japan         26     22         5         1

Italy          24     4         3         17

France         23     –3         4         22

Germany       15    –11        –3        29

Major importers

British India     –100     18       –53        65

China        –81    –41        –11        30

Argentina       –29     –3        –1         25

Australia       –25     –2        –1        22

Ottoman Empire   –20     –1        –7        11

Egypt        –18     –1        17

Canada        –12     –2        –1         9

Brazil         –11     –2         0         9

Source: United States, House of Representatives, 1912, volume 1, appendix A, 212–18.

rates were often driven up by armed conflicts and by piracy. The supremacy
of the British Navy, and its mandate to keep sea lanes open for trade, ensured
that military conflicts were rarely a barrier to commerce and banished piracy
from the seas.

British imperialism thus seemed to contain the seeds of its own downfall.
It had created across Asia and the Middle East giant new coastal cities such
as Alexandria, Bombay, Calcutta, Madras, and Shanghai that enjoyed the
cheapest labor in the world; security of property; complete freedom to import
technicians, machinery, capital, and even the entrepreneurs themselves; easy
access   to major sea routes; and access to the largest market in the world. Any
manufacturer from anywhere in the world could set up a cotton mill in these
cities   and be assured that he or she would have access to an extensive market
in the British Empire on the same terms as British producers.

An outstanding example of the entrepreneurial freedom within the British
Empire is the history of the Sassoon family. The founding member of this
family was David Sassoon, a Sephardic Jew born to the richest merchant family
in Baghdad in 1792. Arrested in 1828 by order of the Ottoman governor for

36  chat R 5 


Figure 5.2 David Sassoon with three of his eight sons in Bombay in 1858.

His son Sassoon David Sassoon was the first in the family to adopt Western
dress. From Jackson, 1968, facing page 32.

defending the Jewish community’s rights, he was ransomed by his father and
fled first to Bushire in Persia. From there he relocated to Bombay in 1832.18
He and his large family prospered as traders in the rapidly growing city.
Though he spoke not a word of English, in 1853 he became a British citizen
and proudly flew the Union Jack. Figure 15.2 shows David Sassoon with three
of his sons in Bombay in 1858.

By 1844 his son Elias had emigrated to China to pursue the opium trade
with India, moving to Shanghai in 1850. Elias soon also invested in the China
Steam Navigation Company and in undeveloped urban land. Another son,

18. To add to the exoticism he brought with him a number of slaves bought from Arabic
tribes, and they continued to serve the family in Bombay; Jackson, 1968, 32.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   37


Figure 5.3 Sir Phillip Sassoon (left) with the Prince of Wales and Winston Churchill in

1921. From Jackson, 1968, facing page 209. Original photograph from The Tatler, 1921.

Sassoon David, was sent to London in 1858 to facilitate the growing trade in
cotton and cotton goods. By the 1880s the family constituted several global
enterprises, investing not only in trading enterprises but also in docks and
cotton factories in Bombay and housing developments in Shanghai. By the
1920s they owned more than one-tenth of the Bombay cotton mills, and they
were the most innovative of the mill owners there.

Many members of the family moved to England and were quickly ab-
sorbed into the English aristocracy. David Sassoon’s great-grandchildren thus
included Siegfried Sassoon, the World War I poet; Sir Phillip Sassoon, friend
of Churchill and the Prince of Wales; Sybil, Marquess of Cholmondeley; and
Rabbi Solomon Sassoon, president of the largest Sephardic seminary in Israel.
Figure 15.3 shows Sir Phillip playing polo.

The world thus seemed poised by the 1850s for rapid economic growth
and for the eventual elimination of international income disparities.

The golden age of the first globalization, 1870–1913, came to an end with
World War I. The disruptions of the war itself were followed by six decades
of relatively turbulent times in the world economy. In the 1920s monetary

38  chat R 5 


problems led to the imposition of tariff controls and limits on capital move-
ments. The Communist takeover isolated the Russian Empire from the world
economy. The global Depression of the 1930s led to further disintegration of
the world economy as nations lost faith in free markets and strove to solve their
problems through protection, capital controls, and currency devaluations.
The disruptions of World War II led to further fragmentation of the world
economy with the creation of a raft of new Communist regimes and the
breakup of much of the British Empire into independent states.

Inspired by economic models that rejected the classical liberal economics
of the British and emphasized instead autarky and centralized government
planning, countries such as India imposed controls on imports of technol-
ogy, managerial expertise, and capital. The international currency stability of
the gold standard in the years 1870–1913 was impossible to re-create over the
long run under the Bretton Woods system, leading by the 1970s to floating
currencies that fluctuated wildly in value. By then inflation and unemploy-
ment had also become persistent problems in many industrialized countries
to an extent not witnessed in the nineteenth century. Only in the 1980s did a
new era of globalization emerge, with worldwide movement toward freer
trade in goods and capital among democracies, combined with the end of
Communist rule (or else its transformation into a Communism in name only,
as    in China).19

World Growth since 1800

What actually happened? The answer, of course, is that, instead of following
England and the other European countries on the path to rapid growth, much
of  the rest of the world languished in poverty. In India, after more than a hun-
dred years of British rule, there were still fifty million hand spindles and two
million hand looms in the 1920s. Figure 15.4 shows just how primitive this
technology was.

The divergence of national incomes and living standards that began with
the Industrial Revolution continues to widen to the present day. In a world
of ever more rapid communication and ever-falling transport costs, the gaps
between countries based on material living standards have become enor-
mous. The gap between material living standards in the richest and poorest

19. O’Rourke and Williamson, 2001; Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   39


Figure 5.4 Hand spinning and weaving in India, 1920s. From Pearse, 1930, 25.

economies of the world is now more than 50:1, while in 1800 it was probably
at most 4:1. Material living standards have increased only tenfold in success-
ful economies such as England and the United States since the Industrial
Revolution. So the poorest economies now, places like Tanzania and Ethiopia,
are  poorer than the average society before the Industrial Revolution. Just as
income inequalities have been compressed within countries since the Industrial
Revolution, so have they widened across countries.

Figure 15.5 shows per capita income for a sample of countries—the United
States, England, Argentina, Bolivia, India, and Uganda—from 1800 to 2000,
all measured in U.S. dollars at the prices of 2000. The divergence in fortunes
since 1800 is very clear. What is also clear is that the divergence was already
well under way during the first period of globalization, 1870–1913; continued
through the period of international economic disintegration, 1913–80; and

320  chat R 5 


36,000

United States

30,000


24,000

England

18,000

12,000


6,000

0

India

Bolivia

Argentina

1800         1850         1900         1950         2000

Uganda

Figure 5.5 Incomes per capita (2000 $). Data from Prados de la Escosura, 2000 (1910) and
Heston et al., 2006 (1950–2000).

persisted as we returned to a more globalized international economy over the
past twenty-five years.

The most notable success has been the United States, which may even
have surpassed Britain in per capita income before 1870.20 Certainly by 1913
the United States was the richest economy in the world. It was also the
biggest, accounting for 17 percent of the entire material output of the world
economy. By 2000 the United States’ share of world output had risen to 22
percent.

Within Europe the countries of northwestern Europe—Belgium, Den-
mark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland—
all behaved as expected and maintained a per capita income relative to Britain
similar to the levels of 1800. In 1913 their incomes all lay within about 80 per-
cent of the per capita income of England.21 A number of countries mainly

20. Relative incomes per person in the United States and the United Kingdom in the
nineteenth century are a matter of continuing controversy. Ward and Devereux, 2003, argue for
high U.S. incomes from early on. Broadberry and Irwin, 2004, argue for the traditional inter-
pretation that the United States overtook Britain only late in the nineteenth century.

21. Prados de la Escosura, 2000.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   32


settled by Europeans also had incomes close to Britain’s: Argentina, Australia,
Canada, and New Zealand. But outside this small club, the technologies of
the Industrial Revolution had surprisingly little effect on incomes per person,
even within Europe. Ireland, only fifty miles across the sea from Britain, still
maintained a per capita income only 60 percent of British levels, and it saw
steady depopulation after 1845 as its workers emigrated to better opportu-
nities in Britain and the United States. All of southern and eastern Europe
remained poor, with incomes per person at only 40–60 percent of British
levels. By 1913 these countries also remained largely devoted to peasant agri-
culture, just as they had been in the eighteenth century. In 1913 the share of
the population employed in agriculture in Britain was a mere 8 percent. In
Romania it was 80 percent and in Bulgaria, 82 percent.

Outside Europe the effects of the Industrial Revolution more than a hun-
dred years after its onset in England were even more slight. Estimated per
capita industrial output actually declined in both India and China up to 1913,
as these countries began exporting raw materials (wheat, jute, indigo, and
opium, in the case of India) to pay for manufactured imports from Britain.
Table 15.8 shows the composition of British India’s imports and exports in
1912–13. As a result of the Industrial Revolution and the British policy of free
trade, low-wage India found its comparative trade advantage in exporting
food and raw materials and importing manufactured products.

In the most dramatic example, Indian raw cotton was exported through
Bombay over 6,800 miles to Lancashire mills, where workers paid four to five
times the daily wages of mill operators in Bombay manufactured it into cloth,
which was then shipped back over 6,800 miles through Bombay to be sold
back to the cultivators of the raw cotton. The net raw material exports of In-
dia in 1912 were about 4 percent of the country’s GDP. Since the agricultural
sector experienced little measurable productivity growth in the years from
1870 to 1949, India benefited from the Industrial Revolution largely through
improving terms of trade for its manufactured imports.

Because we have relatively accurate GDP figures for India dating back to
1873, we can measure its economic decline relative to Britain and the United
States from 1873 to 2003. Figure 15.6 shows calculated GDP per capita for
India from 1873 to 2000 measured relative to that of the United States and
Britain. India did show a substantial increase in absolute GDP per capita over
these years. Real incomes per capita in 1998 were 3.6 times those estimated for
1873. But relative to both Britain and the United States Indian income per

322  chat R 5 


Table 5.8 The Commodity Trade of British India, 1912–13

Imports     Exports     Net exports

(millions     (millions      (millions

Commodity          of dollars)     of dollars)     of dollars)

Grain, pulse, and flour        0        196         195

Jute, raw              0         88         88

Cotton, raw             7         91         84

Seeds                0         74         74

Hides and skins           1         53         52

Tea                 0         43         43

Opium               0         36         36

Oils                17         3         14

Sugar                46         0         46

Other raw materials         34         65         31

All raw materials          106        648         542

Cotton goods           196        40         156

Jute goods              0         74         74

Metals               50         4         47

Railway equipment         21         0         21

Other manufactures        127         6         121

All manufactures         393        123         270

Source: United States, Department of Commerce, 1915.

person fell from 1873 to the mid-1980s, before rising from 1987 to the present.
As late as 1931, 150 years after the factory was introduced in Britain, fewer
than 1 percent of Indian workers were employed in modern factory industries.

Many other countries have witnessed a declining relative income level
as the result of the breakdown of political and social institutions. Thus many
of the countries of Africa, which are now among the world’s poorest, have
suffered from ethnic strife and the collapse of political institutions since their
independence. But the Indian economy experienced its decline during a long
period   of relative political and social stability, under British colonial rule until
1947 and even after independence.

The result of the Industrial Revolution was thus an increased concentra-
tion of global economic output in a very small portion of the world. Table 15.9

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   323


25

British India                Independent India

20

15

India/Britain

10

5                               India/United States

0

1873   1886   1899   1912   1925   1938   1951   1964   1977   1990   2003

Figure 5.6 Indian GDP per capita relative to Britain and the United States, 1873–2003. Data
for India from Heston, 1983 (pre-1947); Heston et al., 2006 (1950–2003). Data for United States
from Balke and Gordon, 1989 (1873–1929); United States, Economic Report of the President,
2004 (1930–2003). Data for Britain from Feinstein, 1972 (1873–1965); United Kingdom, National

Statistical Office (1965–2003).

shows estimates of the world distribution of population and income for 1800,
1870, 1913, and 2000. For most countries outside western Europe, North
America, and Oceania, income per person in the years before 1913 is taken
as  just the same as in 1913, on the grounds that these were still Malthusian
economies then. (North America and Oceania includes Canada, the United
States, Australia, and New Zealand.)

In 1800 western Europe, North America, and Oceania had 12 percent of
world population but 27 percent of world income. Thus even before the In-
dustrial Revolution western Europe and its settlements were a relatively rich
area of the world, producing more than a quarter of its output. By 1913, as a
result of the Industrial Revolution and its delayed diffusion, these two regions
saw their population grow to 20 percent of the world total, and they were
producing 51 percent of all economic output. Output per person in these re-
gions averaged more than four times that in the rest of the world.

By 2000 the share of world output from these regions had fallen to 45

percent. But that was mainly because their population share had fallen to

324  chat R 5 


Table 5.9 World Population and Income Shares, 1800–2000 (percent)

Region           Measure    1800   1870   1913   2000

Western Europe       Population    11    15    14     6

Income     24    37    31    20

North America, Oceania   Population    1     4     6     6

Income      3    10    20    25

East and South Asia     Population    64    56    56    53

Income     47    31    24    32

Latin America        Population    2     3     4     8

Income      4     4     4     8

Africa            Population    7     7     5    13

Income      9     7     4     4

Sources: Heston et al., 2006, for 2000; Prados de la Escosura, 2000, and Maddison, 2001,
for 1913; Maddison, 2001, for incomes and populations in 1870 and populations in 1800. For

1800, incomes in western Europe relative to England were estimated from van Zanden, 1999,
and Allen, 2001. For other countries income in 1800 was taken to be the same as in 1870.

Note: Shares are percentages. Western Europe includes Austria, Germany, Italy, Sweden, and

all countries to the west.

12 percent of the world total. Output per person in western Europe, North
America, and Oceania had now actually risen to six times that in the rest of
the world.

South and East Asia have always held the majority of the world’s popu-
lation, though that preponderance has been declining. But by 1870 the re-
gions’ share of world output had fallen to less than a third, and it was still at
that level in 2000. By 2000 output per person in Asia was rising relative to the
rest of the world, but this gain has been balanced by a steady decline in Africa.
While Africa’s share of world population has increased, output per person
in Africa is now just 30 percent of the world average. Output per person in
North America and Oceania in 2000 was fourteen times that of Africa.

There is now almost instant communication between different countries
of the world; a vigorous exchange of foods, styles, and music; and an ever-
rising flow of goods internationally. But the divergence of incomes ensures
that the poor countries of the world remain as exotic to the rich as they were
in the seventeenth or eighteenth century. Even in as relatively prosperous a
part of the underdeveloped world as India, workers new to cities such as
Bombay (Mumbai) or Madras (Chennai) sometimes still sleep on the streets.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   325


Figure 5.7 Slum dwellings occupied by squatters at Bandra Station in Mumbai, India.

Figure 5.8 Middle-class living in the United States: 4,000 square feet inhabited by two
people and one small dog.


Thousands live in improvised shacks without water or toilet facilities on
public lands, on pavements, or along the edges of the commuter rail lines. In
India as a whole in 2002 the average dwelling area per person was 84 square
feet (figure 15.7).22

In contrast, in the richest major country in the world, the average Amer-
ican in 2001 lived in a dwelling with 750 square feet per person, and even the
poorest fifth of the population enjoyed 560 square feet per person. Some 8
percent of American houses now have 4,000 square feet or more, for an
average family size of 2.6 people.23 These new McMansions (figure 15.8) are
now  a standard feature of middle-class American life. How did such a world
arise? We seek the answer in the next chapter.

22. Government of India, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 2004.

23. United States, Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, 2004,
tables HC1-1a and HC1-3a.

w o RL  GR Ow th sc 800   327


6  The Proximate Sources of Divergence

True Philosophy invents nothing, it describes and establishes what is.

—Victor Cousin (1854)1

Why has world development since the Industrial Revolution demonstrated
the surprising divergence described in the previous chapter? This question
has occasioned a mountain of printed pages, and a storm of debate, ever since
the increasing gap between rich and poor nations became apparent in the late
nineteenth century.

Commentators, having visited climate, race, nutrition, education, and
culture, have persistently returned to one theme: the failure of political and
social institutions in poor countries. Yet, as we shall see, this theme can be
shown to manifestly fail in two ways. It does not describe the anatomy of the
divergence we observe: the details of why poor countries remain poor. And
the medicine of institutional and political reform has failed repeatedly to cure
the patient.2

Yet, like the physicians of the prescientific era who prescribed bloodletting
as the cure for ailments they did not understand, the modern economic doc-
tors continue to prescribe the same treatment year after year through such cult
centers as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. If the med-
icine fails to cure, then the only possible conclusion is that more is needed.

Like growth itself, described in chapter 10, differences in income per per-
son across economies can have only three basic sources: differences in capital
per person, differences in land per person, and differences in efficiency.

1. Cousin (1854), 216.

2. See, for example, Easterly, 2001.

328


This chapter shows that, at the most general level, differences in effi-
ciency are the ultimate explanation for most of the gap in incomes between
rich and poor countries in the modern economy. Just as with growth over time,
discussed in chapter 10, the proximate cause of differences in income per
person across countries is about one-quarter the stocks of physical capital
per person and three-quarters the efficiency of utilization of all inputs.3 But,
to an approximation, we can take the world capital market as having been in-
tegrated since the nineteenth-century improvements in communication and
trade. In a world where capital flowed easily between economies, capital itself
responded to differences in country efficiency levels. Inefficient countries
ended up with small capital stocks and efficient ones large amounts of capi-
tal. And efficiency differences explain almost all variations between countries in
income levels.

Differences in efficiency could stem from discrepancies in access to the lat-
est technologies, from economies of scale, or from failures to utilize imported
technologies appropriately. The argument below is that the major source of
these efficiency differences was a failure to utilize technologies effectively. But
this failure took a peculiar form. It was rooted in an inability to effectively
employ labor in production, so that output per worker, even using the latest
technology, was peculiarly low in the poorest countries.

Capital and Divergence

There is ample evidence that capital returns (the interest rate earned on cap-
ital), though not fully equalized, were similar enough that we can regard cap-
ital as flowing freely around the world by 1900.4 Figure 16.1, for example,
shows rates of return on government bonds in nineteen countries in 1900–14
at  a variety of income levels as a function of the relative level of output per
capita in 1910. There was variation in the rates of return on these bonds in the
range of 2:1. So the market is clearly not functioning perfectly. But whatever
variation there was had little correlation with the income level of the country.
Indeed there is no statistically significant decline in bond returns with income.
As  far as we know capital returns were not correlated with the income level,

3. See, for example, Easterly and Levine, 2001.

4. International capital markets did disintegrate during the economic and political troubles
of the 1920s and 1930s, and they have only recently returned to the level of integration of
1870–1914. See Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004.

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   329


8

Portugal

6


Japan

Russia

Italy

Argentina

New Zealand


4

Egypt

Sweden

Switzerland

Germany

Australia

United States


India

Netherlands

Ireland     Belgium

Britain

Canada

2                               France

0

0.0      0.2      0.4      0.6      0.8      1.0      1.2      1.4

Income per person (Britain = 1)

Figure 6. Government bond returns, 1900–14. In the absence of national bonds for the
United States municipal bonds were used. Egyptian income per person was assumed the same
as in the Ottoman Empire. Irish returns were assumed the same as British. Data from table 14.1.
Realized returns for India and New Zealand (1870–1913): Edelstein, 1982, 125. Belgium, Britain,
Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Switzerland, United States: Homer and
Sylla, 1996. Argentina, Australia (sterling bonds in London), Egypt, Japan, Portugal, Russia, Swe-
den: Mauro et al., 2006.

hence the efficiency, of countries, and so they cannot explain why richer
countries had more capital.

We can also get rates of return on private borrowing by looking at returns
on railway debentures. Railways were the biggest private borrowers in the in-
ternational capital markets of the late nineteenth century. And their capital
needs were so great that, if they were able to borrow at international rates of
return, such borrowing would help equalize rates of return across all assets
in domestic capital markets. Table 16.1 shows the realized rates of return (the
returns after taking into account defaults) earned by investors in railway
debentures in the London capital market between 1870 and 1913. Again there
are variations across countries. But importantly for our purposes this variation
does not correlate with output per person. Indeed India, one of the poorest
economies in the world, had among the lowest railway interest costs because

330  chat R 6 


Table 6. Realized Rates of Return on Railway Debentures,

1870–1913

Output per person    Rate of return

Country or region       (2000 $)         (%)

United States          5,116          6.03

Canada             4,953          4.99

United Kingdom        4,300          3.74

Argentina            4,136          5.13

Brazil               —           5.10

Western Europe         3,320          5.28

Eastern Europe         2,231          5.33

British India           544          3.65

Source: Edelstein, 1982, 125.

the Indian government guaranteed the bonds of the railways as a way of pro-
moting investment in infrastructure.

World capital markets were well integrated by 1913 for three reasons: the
huge overseas investments of the British, the secure investment environment
of the British Empire, and the popularity of the gold standard. The British
by 1910 had overseas investments that amounted to about twice their GDP.
This implied that about a third of the capital owned by British investors was
invested abroad. The existence of this huge pool of investment seeking a
home overseas helped make London the preeminent world financial center
before 1914. But it also helped lubricate the market by creating a center where
investors and borrowers could gather, and where information about oppor-
tunities could be aggregated. The British Empire aided the export of capital
from all the advanced economies to the poorer ones by giving investors secu-
rity through the guarantee offered by imperial laws and protections. Finally
the pegging of many currencies to gold in the late nineteenth century re-
moved much of the currency risk from investing abroad, since the relative
value of many currencies remained unchanged for thirty or forty years prior
to 1914.

This rich capital market allowed poor countries to borrow large sums,
and the significant capital flows into these countries helped achieve a rough

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   33


equalization of returns to poor and rich countries. By 1913 Argentina, Brazil,
Egypt, Mexico, the Ottoman Empire, and Peru had all attracted at least $50 of
foreign investment per capita. This implies that nations such as the Ottoman
Empire, with an estimated income per person of $125 in U.S. prices of 1913,
had significantly augmented their capital stock through foreign borrowing.5
The numbers in table 16.1 show how the London market valued railroad
investments, not the actual rate of return on the money spent on railway
infrastructure in these countries. If the developers of railroads in poorer coun-
tries,   for example, had access to monopoly opportunities or franchises, then
the rate of return on the investments could exceed the rate of return available
to financial investors on the London market. Yet the financial rate of return
in London would still indicate the cost of borrowing for railway enterprises in

these countries.

Lance Davis and Robert Huttenback calculated the actual profit rate of
firms in various parts of the world by comparing earnings to the book value
of their capital (the cost of their initial investment). In 1860–1912 the returns
on all capital were as follows: British companies investing at home, 5.6 per-
cent; British companies investing in the British Empire, 6.5 percent; and
British companies investing in other foreign countries, 5.5 percent.6 The sim-
ilarity in rates of return suggests that, whatever was slowing down the rate of
industrialization in poor countries, it was not a lack of capital, for capital in-
vested  abroad seems to have earned little or no more than capital invested at
home, at least in the case of British investors. This is what we would expect
if capital markets functioned reasonably well.

The one case we can find in which capital markets seem to have functioned
badly is, ironically, within the United States, the world’s richest economy.
Here rates of return throughout the nineteenth century were much higher in
the West than in the older, settled East. In the 1860s, for example, as the cen-
tral valley of California was being settled, mortgage loans were made at the
rate of 26 percent per year at a time when mortgages in Boston were offered
at 6 percent. Rates fell rapidly in California, but in 1889 West Coast interest
rates were still 4–6 percent above those in the Northeast.7 These disparities

5. Pamuk, 1987. Relative incomes from Prados de la Escosura, 2000.

6. Davis and Huttenback, 1988, 107.

7. Rhode, 1995, 789. Rates in California were 9.0 percent, as opposed to 5.6 percent in

Massachusetts; Eichengreen, 1984, 1010.

332  chat R 6 


30


Japan

25

Switzerland


20

India

Portugal

15   China

10

Russia

Spain

Bohemia

Italy

Germany

France

England

United States

5

0

0.00     0.20     0.40     0.60     0.80     1.00     1.20     1.40

Income per person (Britain = 1)

Figure 6.2 Estimated purchase price of capital goods, textile mills, 1910. Data from table 14.1

and Clark, 1987a.

were the result of legal limitations on the development of interstate banking
in the United States, which made it difficult for capital to flow from Europe
or the eastern United States to the West. Yet, despite the persistently high cost
of capital, the American West developed rapidly in the late nineteenth cen-
tury. Thus in the late nineteenth century capital was scarce in the richest
economy in the world, the United States, and cheap in perhaps the poorest,
India.

The second important element in the cost of capital, along with the rate
of return, is the cost of capital goods. If these were very expensive in poor
economies this would also drive up the overall cost of capital.

We can measure this cost for textile mills around 1910 across the rich-
est and poorest countries. Figure 16.2 shows the cost per spindle for a fully
equipped new textile mill in 1910 in various countries around the world, as a
function of levels of income per person. There is no correlation between the
cost  of these capital goods, in textiles generally imported from Britain, and
the level of income per person. On average, at least by 1910, poor countries
had access to capital goods in a major industry like textiles on the same terms
as rich ones.

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   333


2.5


2.0

1.5

China

Philippines

Japan

Argentina

Australia


India

Egypt
Turkey

Portugal

Greece

Italy

Spain

Norway

France

Germany


1.0

0.5

Poland

Denmark

Netherlands  Belgium

Britain

United States

0.0

0.00     0.20     0.40     0.60     0.80     1.00     1.20     1.40

Income per person (Britain = 1)

Figure 6.3 Coal costs versus GDP per person, circa 1910. Coal costs from table 16.2 and Clark,

1987a. Incomes from Prados de la Escosura, 2000.

Resources and Divergence

The improvements in transportation discussed in chapter 15 also ensured that
access to the resources needed for industrialization was not a big obstacle for
most economies by 1900. Figure 16.3 shows, for example, the cost of a ton of
coal of constant quality relative to the GDP per person in various economies
in 1907. Coal, the main source of energy for industry in 1907, was slightly
cheaper in the high-income economies, but the difference was modest. Ge-
ography and access to resources explain little of the divergence in incomes.
The world created by the Industrial Revolution is one in which lack of native
resources became unimportant as a barrier to industrialization, except for a
few landlocked or topographically disadvantaged countries.

Efficiency and Divergence

The unimportance of resources and the relatively uniform cost of capital, at
least in 1870–1913, imply that differences in efficiency must be the overwhelm-

334  chat R 6 


1.2

United States

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

India

0.0

0.00      0.20      0.40      0.60      0.80      1.00      1.20

Output per worker (United States = 1)

Figure 6.4 Capital per worker versus output per worker, 1990. Data from Penn World Tables, 5.6.

ing cause of differences in income per capita across countries in the modern
world.

There is always a strong correlation between physical capital per person
and income per person across countries in the modern world. Figure 16.4
shows this association for a sample of countries in 1990. At a proximate level
capital per person explains perhaps a quarter of income differences across
countries in the modern world. But with capital free to flow across countries,
and earning a rental that differs little across income levels, efficiency differ-
ences explain most of the variation in capital stocks. So at a deeper level effi-
ciency differences are the core of the variation in income per capita across
economies since the Industrial Revolution. The same formula that explained
how income grew over time,


gy ≈ gk

g

≈ ——— ,

(1 – a)

explains why income varies across countries in the modern world. Indeed
taking the income levels of a group of countries across the world in 1913, and
making corrections for the amount of land per person and the effect of the

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   335


1.5


1.2

Germany

Britain

United States


0.9

Japan

Italy

0.6

0.3

India

0.0

0.0        0.3        0.6        0.9        1.2        1.5

Output per person (Britain = 1)

Figure 6.5 Efficiency versus output per worker, 1913.

return on capital on capital stocks, we still see that income per person varia-
tion is overwhelmingly associated with efficiency differences.

Figure 16.5 shows this connection. By 1913 the efficiency of economies
around the world, the amount of output per unit of all inputs, varied by
a factor of at least 5:1. In a world of free-flowing capital, differences in the
efficiencies of economies are translated into much bigger differences in income
through the concentration of capital in the high-efficiency areas. Thus Britain
is estimated to have five times the efficiency of the Indian economy in 1913,
but nearly eight times the income per person.

Thus there is a surprising correspondence between the sources of income
growth over time since the Industrial Revolution and the causes of the diver-
gence in incomes between economies in the modern world. But the cause of
the differences in efficiency across countries is very different from the cause
of the differences in efficiency over time

Why Were Poor Countries Inefficient?

Poor economies since the Industrial Revolution have been characterized mainly
by inefficiency in production. Their problem, however, was typically not in

336  chat R 6 


gaining access to new technologies. The problem, it turns out, was in using
these new technologies effectively. We can see this most clearly by looking at
the two major industries found in almost all economies by 1910: factory pro-
duction of cotton textiles and railways.

Cotton textiles seemed the path to industrialization for the poor coun-
tries of the world before World War I. There was a ready local market for tex-
tile products everywhere and also a huge, open international market. Textile
mills were not capital intensive. And the optimal mill size was small com-
pared even to market sizes in the smallest countries. In practice, as table 15.7
shows, England dominated the world market, with only modest competition
from Japan, Italy, France, and Germany.

The technology was readily available internationally, at moderate prices,
through exports of machinery by British engineering firms. Unskilled labor
accounted for the majority of production costs in such countries as England.
And  the poor countries had abundant quantities of cheap, unskilled labor. A
contemporary writer on the cotton industry thus noted that

India enjoys a great advantage over England, for the advantage which
England possessed in regard to skilled labor most certainly does not apply
as   in former years . . . with the marvelously perfect and self-acting ma-
chinery of today no special skill is required on the part of the attendant.
The machinery itself supplies the intelligence; all that is required from the
workman is attention in “following up” the machinery, such as piecing
up broken ends, doffing, and other simple details, which are performed
by the native Indian cotton factory operative almost as well as by his
European brethren, and at far less cost to the spinner.8

From at least the 1850s onward poor countries, with their huge advantages in
labor cost, should have taken over the cotton textile industry, driving out the
British from the unprotected markets.

Table 16.2 shows the comparative costs of England and some low-wage
competitors in 1910. Wages in the textile industry varied widely. Those in
England were ten times those in China. Indeed wages were so low in China
that some mills searched workers leaving the mills to ensure they had not
stuffed any cotton into their pockets, since even small amounts of cotton
would have added significantly to their wages (a pound of raw cotton was

8. Walmsley, 1893, 50.

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   337


Table 6.2

Cotton Textile Costs, 1910

Plant and                Implied

County   Weekly wage  machinery  Coal    Total cost   profit rate
or region   ($/55 hours)  ($/spindle)  ($/ton)  (England = 100)   (%)

U.S. South    6.5      17     3.8      130       1

England      5.0      13     2.5      100       8

Spain       2.7      19     6.5      91       10

Mexico      2.6      19    10.0      94       10

Russia       2.4      21     7.2      91       10

Italy       2.4      16     7.2      81       14

Japan       0.8      25     2.6      73       14

India       0.8      18     5.0      61       19

China       0.5      16     3.2      53       22

Source: Clark, 1987a.

worth about $0.25). In most countries wages were the most important element
in producing cloth, after the cost of the raw cotton. In England in 1911 the
costs (excluding that of raw cotton) broke down as follows: wages, 62 percent;
machinery depreciation plus supplies, 12 percent; power, 3 percent; interest
costs  on capital, 22 percent.

Machinery was less expensive in England than in most other countries.
England was the center of the textile machine–building industry, and most
other countries bought their machinery from England. Their costs were thus
inflated by the expenses of transporting the machinery to their mills, and the
additional costs of setting it up when mechanics had to be brought out from
England. It is estimated that the cost of shipping English machinery to U.S.
mills was about 25 percent of the value of the machinery. The countries with
high machine costs, such as Russia, often had a tariff on machine imports.9

England also had low power costs, because its cotton industry was cen-
tered in the same region as its coal fields. Some other countries, such as Mex-
ico, had high power costs because coal had to be imported first by sea and
then by rail from the port. But as figure 16.2 shows the costs were only slightly
higher on average for low-wage countries.

9. Japanese mills were so expensive per spindle because the costs included dormitories
built to accommodate the workers, who were mostly teenage girls.

338  chat R 6 


The fifth column of table 16.2 shows what total manufacturing costs
should have been in each country if each country operated under exactly the
same conditions as in England: kept its mills open for the same number of
hours, used steam engine boilers requiring as much fuel per hour as those in
England, and ran the machines at English speeds. The last column shows the
implied profit rate in each country if it were to sell its output in the English
market, assuming English mills made an 8 percent return. Most of the low-
wage competitors should have been able to sell profitably in English markets
in 1910. Some of them, such as India and China, should have made enormous
profits selling in the open international market.

The low-wage countries actually had a further major advantage over
British producers. The struggles of social reformers and labor unions in England
in the nineteenth century had led to a series of Factory Acts that sought to
tame what was perceived as the savage mastery of machine over worker. These
laws limited adult workers to fifty-five-hour weeks and children to half these
hours. Women and children were prohibited from doing night work. Since
women represented over 60 percent of the labor force in English mills, and an
even higher proportion in some occupations such as weaving, the mills chose
not to run at night. English mills ran only 2,775 hours per year.

Low-wage countries either had no such restrictions or else did not enforce
the ones they did have. Most chose to run long hours using night workers.
Mexican mills, for example, ran 6,750 hours out of a possible 8,760 in the year,
an average of 18.5 hours per day. The work day was longer, double shifts were
assigned, and fewer holidays were taken.

Longer hours substantially lowered the cost of production by reducing
the capital costs per spindle-hour. Table 16.3 shows the hours of operation for
mills in the various countries and their revised capital costs, total manufactur-
ing costs, and implied profit rates. All the low-wage countries look as though
they ought to have been able to undersell the English. Some, like the Chinese,
ought to have made enormous profits. The puzzle is all the stranger since
many of the lowest-wage producers had both native raw cotton and access to
major ocean trade routes. Brazil, China, Egypt, India, Mexico, Peru, Russia,
and Uganda all produced cotton, and Brazil, China, Egypt, and India all had
excellent ocean transport facilities.

Yet up until 1913 England remained the low-cost producer for both yarn
and cloth, as witnessed by table 16.2. Its only competitors were Japan, Italy,
France, and Germany. High-wage England led the world market because the

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   339


Table 6.3 Cotton Textile Costs Adjusted for Hours, 1910

Plant and               Implied

County      Hours    machinery     Total cost     profit rate
or region     per year    ($/spindle)    (England = 100)     (%)

U.S. South    3,450      16         126         1

England      2,775      13         100         8

Spain       4,455      15         84        14

Mexico      6,750      12         82        14

Russia       4,061      16         84        17

Italy        3,150      16         79        14

Japan       6,526      13         62        25

India       3,744      15         58        23

China       5,302      12         48        33

Source: Clark, 1987a.

mills in these other countries could never attain English efficiency levels. But
their inefficiency had a peculiar form. They were inefficient in the use of
labor, not in the use of capital. Even though they were using the same ma-
chines as the high-wage economies, they employed many more workers per
machine, without obtaining any additional output from the machines. Thus in
ring spinning one worker in the northern United States tended 900 spindles,
while one worker in China tended only 170. On plain looms a worker in the
northern United States managed eight looms at a time, in China only one or
two. The numbers of workers per machine varied by about 6:1 across coun-
tries (figures 16.6 and 16.7).

Figure 16.8 shows actual labor costs per unit of output versus the wage
rate per fifty-five hours in the international cotton textile industry around
1910. Wage costs were on average lower in the lowest-wage countries, but by
very modest amounts compared to the huge differences in wage rates. Labor
costs per hour varied by 16:1, while labor costs per unit of output varied by
only 3:1.

This extra labor employed in the low-wage countries was not an attempt
by management to utilize expensive machines more intensively. There is no
sign that mills in low-wage countries gained more output per machine by em-
ploying these supernumerary workers. Output on ring spinning machines, for
example, was almost entirely a function of the speeds at which the machines

340  chat R 6 


Figure 6.6 Ring spinning in the United States, 1939.

Figure 6.7 Indian ring spinners and supervisor, 1920s.


2.0

1.5


1.0

India

Egypt

Russia

England


0.5

China

Japan

0.0

0         2         4         6         8         10

Weekly wage ($)

Figure 6.8 Labor costs per unit compared to wage rates, 1910. Data from Clark, 1987a, 152.

ran. It was possible to vary the speed, with faster running requiring more ten-
ders per machine, since the threads would break more frequently. Figure 16.9
shows the speeds specified for ring spinning machines ordered by different
countries from Platt as a function of the wages of operators in those countries.
The poorest countries specified slightly faster operating speeds, but this was
an insignificant difference compared to the extra labor they employed.

Another modern industry found in both the richest and poorest coun-
tries before 1914 was the railway. As with cotton textiles, there seems to have
been little variation in the technology between rich and poor countries. Many
railways across the world were built by British engineers, who employed the
latest British technology. British locomotive constructors in the late nineteenth
century produced the bulk of their locomotives for foreign markets, particu-
larly those in the British Empire. Figure 16.10 shows a mainstay of the Indian
railways, the 0-6-0 locomotive, and its English counterpart from the same
period. Even to the untrained eye the technology looks the same.

The major complaint about railways in India in the British period was
indeed not inferior technology, but railways that were built to an uneconom-
ically high standard. Encouraged by the guarantee system, which promised

342  chat R 6 


12,000


9,000

China

Japan


India

England

6,000

3,000

0

0         2         4         6         8         10

Weekly wage ($)

Figure 6.9 Machine outputs and operative wages, 1910.

bondholders a generous minimum return, railroad builders in India were
happy to indulge their British engineers’ taste for high-quality rails, locomo-
tives, and rolling stock. A manager of the Eastern Bengal State Railway, tour-
ing the United States in 1901, remarked that most American railways were not
up to “European or Indian standards.”10

But if the equipment was often British, the staffing practices of railways
in poorer countries were decidedly un-British. Figure 16.11 shows the revenue
generated per worker-hour in twenty-two countries around 1913. The range in
output per worker-hour is about 6:1, and again the United States is the high-
est and India the lowest.

The Indian rail system took advantage of extensive English operating
expertise. In 1910 the Indian railroads employed 7,207 “Europeans” (mainly
British) and 8,862 “Eurasians” (principally Anglo-Indians), who occupied al-
most all the supervisory and skilled positions. Indian locomotive drivers were
employed only after 1900, and even as late as 1910 many of the locomotive
drivers were still British.11

10. Headrick, 1988, 75.

11. Morris and Dudley, 1975; Headrick, 1988, 322.

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   343


Figure 6. Indian and English locomotives of the same class, built in 1905 and 1908.
Which is which?


0.8


0.6

Norway

New Zealand

United States

Australia


0.4

0.2

China

Thailand

Mexico

Russia

Japan

United Kingdom

Belgium
Netherlands

India

0.0

0.0      0.2      0.4      0.6      0.8      1.0      1.2      1.4

Income per person (Britain = 1)

Figure 6. Output per railway worker-hour, 1913–14. Data from Boag, 1912, and Bureau of
Railway Economics, 1915.

Yet again the extra workers in India, and in other poor countries, do not
seem to have procured for their employers any increase in output per unit of
capital. Because of the very different operating conditions of railways in dif-
ferent countries, capital utilization is hard to compare. But there are partial
indicators that suggest no gains for countries that employed huge excesses
of  labor.

One that is available for most countries, and that is shown in figure 16.12,
is miles run per locomotive per year. Locomotive utilization was no higher
in low-income, low-output-per-worker countries. As in cotton textiles, man-
agers of railways in these countries seemingly gained nothing from their extra
labor inputs.

Thus in both cotton textiles and railways around 1910 we observe the same
picture. Poor countries used the same technology as rich ones. They achieved
the same levels of output per unit of capital. But in doing so they employed
so much more labor per machine that they lost most of the labor cost advan-
tages with which they began.

The problem of persistent inefficiency in labor use in poor countries like
India was the main barrier to the spread of the technologies of the Industrial

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   345


40,000


30,000

20,000

10,000

China

Thailand

Japan

Italy

Ireland

Netherlands

Denmark

England
Belgium

United States
Australia

0

0.0     0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0     1.2     1.4

Income per person (Britain = 1)

Figure 6.2 Miles run per locomotive per year (an indicator of capital utilization on railways)

across countries, 1913–14. Data from Boag, 1912, and Bureau of Railway Economics, 1915.

Revolution. Table 16.4, for example, shows the gross profit rates of Bombay
cotton mills from 1907–09 to 1935–38, as well as the size of the Bombay in-
dustry and output per worker as an index, with 1905–09 set at 100. Since the
mills operated in a competitive market profits were never high. The best years
for the industry, during World War I and its immediate aftermath, saw profit
rates of only 7–8 percent. Despite profit rates that averaged only 6.5 percent
between 1907 and 1924, the industry in Bombay grew by 45 percent, once
again testifying to the smooth functioning of international capital markets in
these years.

However, from 1907 to 1924 there was no increase, and perhaps a slight
decline, in output per worker in Bombay. At the same time the Japanese
cotton industry increased output per worker by 80 percent. By the late 1920s
Japanese competition had eliminated all profits from the Bombay industry.
As output per worker in Japanese mills marched ever upward through the
1920s and 1930s, Bombay mills were hardly able to cover their operating
costs. By 1938 nearly 15 percent of the capacity in the Bombay mills had been
scrapped.

346  chat R 6 


Table 6.4 The Bombay Cotton Textile Industry, 1907–1938

Gross profit  Industry size              Output
rate on     (million      Output      per worker

fixed capital    spindle-     per worker      in Japan
Year       (%)     equivalents)   (1905–09 = 100)  (1905–09 = 100)

1907–09     6       3.1        100         100

1910–14     5       3.4        103         115

1915–19     7       3.7        99         135

1920–24     8       4.0        94         132

1925–29     0       4.5        91         180

1930–34     0       4.4        104         249

1935–38     2       3.9        106         281

Sources: Profits and output per worker were calculable only for the mills listed in the In-
vestor’s India Yearbook; Wolcott and Clark, 1999.

The situation in 1910, in which excess labor without apparent benefits in
the form of capital utilization was found in low-income countries, persisted
throughout the twentieth century in the cotton textile industry. A 1969 study
by   the English Textile Council looked at output per machine-hour and per
worker-hour in the best-performing quartile of cotton spinning and weaving
firms across eleven major producer nations in 1967. Howard Pack added to
this comparison the performance of the best quartile of Kenyan and Philip-
pines firms in 1980 (on the same vintage of equipment as the earlier study).
Figures 16.13 and 16.14 show the estimated output per machine-hour, averaged
over spinning and weaving, and output per worker-hour.

The strong correlation between wages and output per worker continues
until the present day, as do surprisingly high labor costs in low-wage coun-
tries. The increased divergence in incomes between regions, even since 1910,
created an even greater divergence in the wages manufacturers faced in differ-
ent countries of the world by 2000. Figure 16.15 shows the full hourly labor
cost of production workers in garment manufacturing, a simple industry
using small amounts of capital, across various countries in 2002. Even dis-
counting the outliers, labor costs varied from $0.40 per hour to $12 per hour,
a  range of about 30:1.

The technology in industries such as garment making and textiles is rel-
atively standard. In making a pair of jeans, labor costs even in such low-wage

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   347


1.5

1.2


0.9

India

United States

0.6

0.3

0.0

0      3,000      6,000      9,000     12,000     15,000     18,000

Income per person (2000 $)

Figure 6.3 Output per cotton textile machine-hour, 1967. Data from Pack, 1987, 140–45.

3.0


2.5

United States

2.0

1.5

1.0

India

0.5

0.0

0       3,000      6,000      9,000     12,000     15,000     18,000

Income per person (2000 $)

Figure 6.4 Output per cotton textile worker-hour, 1967. Data from Pack, 1987, 140–45.


21

18

15

12                                       United States

9

6

India

3

0

0          9,000         18,000         27,000         36,000

Income per person 2000 (1996 $)

Figure 6.5 Wages in garment manufacturing, 2002, versus income per person, 2000. Wages
from Abernathy et al., 2005, table 1, and United States, Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2006.

economies as China, Mexico, and Nicaragua, account for about 75 percent of
all costs, including transport to the U.S. market. The cost of shipping a pair
of jeans from a clothing workshop almost anywhere in the world to the high-
wage markets of the United States is no more than $0.09 per pair (1 percent
of the wholesale cost of about $8).12 With the ending of quotas in the U.S.
market, and the agreement of the European Union countries to allow manu-
factures from the fifty poorest countries, as well as twelve Mediterranean coun-
tries, to be imported free of tariffs, we would expect to see apparel manufac-
turing booming across Africa, and apparel industries disappearing in any
high-wage country.

While there have been major increases in imports into countries like the
United States, a number of surprising features appear. The first is that, despite
its extraordinarily high labor cost, U.S. production of apparel in 2004 was still
42 percent of its consumption.13 The second is that the major exporters to

12. Abernathy et al., 2005, table 2.

13. Ibid., figure 1.

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   349


1.2

Mexico

1.0

0.8


0.6

China

Honduras


0.4

Nicaragua

0.2

0.0

0.0       0.5       1.0       1.5       2.0       2.5       3.0

Labor cost ($/hour)

Figure 6.6 Wage rates and output per worker in clothing production, 2002. Data from Aber-
nathy et al., 2005, table 2.

the United States and the European Union were often countries with high
wages compared to sub-Saharan Africa. Thus Mexico and Costa Rica con-
tinue as major suppliers to the U.S. market, even though they have wages
more than six times those of most sub-Saharan countries and of the Indian
subcontinent. Turkey, with wages similar to Mexico, continues as a major
supplier  to the European Union, in free competition for some time with sub-
Saharan countries and the Indian subcontinent.14 Indeed the level of African
exports of apparel remains extremely small.

It is clear once again that this situation is sustained by differences in out-
put per worker across exporters that correlate with the countries’ wage levels.
Figure 16.16 shows, for China, Honduras, Mexico, and Nicaragua, labor pro-
ductivity in 2002 versus the industry wage rate.

There has been a suggestion that Africa’s soils and climate have been the
major impediment to agricultural advance, explaining its recent extreme

14. Abernathy et al., 2005, table 5-6, figure 2.

350  chat R 6 


poverty.15 The majority of the populations in tropical Africa still depend on
agriculture for their livelihoods. But any such considerations would quickly
become irrelevant had African countries been able to exploit their expected
cost advantage in such basic manufacturing industries as apparel and textiles.
Yet we know that as far back as the 1950s textile manufacturers from India
and England were finding that mills established in Uganda and Kenya offered
little or no profit despite protective tariffs.16

Thus the crucial variable in explaining the success or failure of economies
in the years 1800–2000 is the efficiency of the production process within the
economy. Inefficiencies in poor countries took a very specific form: the em-
ployment of extra production workers per machine without any correspond-
ing  gain in output per unit of capital. The next chapter investigates the source
of these puzzling efficiency differences.

15. Gallup and Sachs, 2000; Sachs, 2001.

16. Clarence-Smith, 2005, 35–36.

th  R OX at so UR C s o v R G c   35


7  Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed?

It is difficult to conjecture, from the conduct of him whom we see in a low con-
dition, how he would act if wealth and power were put into his hands.

—Samuel Johnson, Rambler No. 172 (November 9, 1751)

In the previous chapters we saw that one of the surprising root causes of the
increasing differences in income across the world was low output per worker,
with no compensating gain in output per unit of capital, even when the most
modern technologies were in use. This finding makes institutional explana-
tions for the Great Divergence hard to sustain. Why would institutions in-
fluence the internal efficiency of production enterprises once they have been
established?

These international differences in output per worker had appeared in the
cotton textile industry by the 1840s, and they are even more pronounced in
many sectors now. This chapter seeks explanations for these output differ-
ences, and for the pattern of increasing divergence in incomes seen since the
Industrial Revolution.

The first argument is that these differences in labor productivity must
stem from differences in the quality of labor in production across societies,
differences that stem largely from the local social environment. That much
can   be firmly established.

Regarding the deeper issue of why these differences have had such a pro-
found influence on income per capita in the modern world compared with
earlier periods, we can pose a number of hypotheses. The first is that the end-
ing of the Malthusian era allowed existing differences in social energy across
societies to translate into much larger differences in income. The second is
that modern medicine has lowered the floor established through the sub-

352


sistence wage. The third is that the technology developed since the Industrial
Revolution has been of a kind much less forgiving of deficiencies in the qual-
ity   of labor input.

Finally at the even deeper level, of what might be the ultimate source of
these socially determined differences in labor quality, we can offer only the
most tentative of ideas. The strange thing about world history is that, while
the world before 1800 is fairly knowable, the world since then has become in-
creasingly difficult to understand.

Is Labor the Problem in Poor Countries?

Despite the fact that in low-wage economies we observe empirically many
more workers per machine than we would expect, with no greater output per
machine, it is not obvious that deficiencies in the labor input are the problem.
Perhaps the problem is one of management.

The idea that there were great variations in the quality of labor forces
between rich and poor countries was certainly a staple of writing on trade and
industry in the era of the Pax Britannica.

When Britain was at its economic apogee in the middle and late nine-
teenth century, a number of writers argued that its ability to pay high wages
and still prosper in international competition derived mainly from the much
greater intensity of labor in Britain compared to its low-wage competitors.
These writers maintained that British workers were able to operate more ma-
chinery per worker, mitigating or even eliminating the wage cost advantage of
the low-wage countries.

Karl Marx himself endorsed this view. The first volume of Capital, pub-
lished in 1867, contains a short chapter, “National Differences in Wages,” which
attributes high output per worker in British textile mills to high labor inten-
sity.1 For Marx it was further proof of the poor treatment of workers under
capitalism that the higher wages of workers in the advanced capitalist economies
were  in large part the result of their own greater efforts. Per unit of effective
labor, he argued, workers in Britain were still paid the subsistence wage.

This view of higher British labor intensity was not original to Marx. He
was merely quoting what seems to have been, for British and American econ-

1. Marx, 1990, 701–06.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?  353


omists of the late nineteenth century, a kind of orthodoxy. By that time
British managers had had plenty of experience working with foreign labor
in railway construction and in the international textile industry. Under British
management production in different countries required different amounts
of   labor. Indeed there were overtly racist discussions at the time, focused on
such questions as how many Chinese, Indian, or African workers were the
equivalent of one British worker.2 There were also arguments about whether
differences in labor efficiency did or did not completely offset differences in
day wages, making the real cost of labor constant internationally.3

This was probably the dominant view of the cause of variations in out-
put per worker in modern industry across countries up until World War II.
A 1922 report by an agent of the U.S. Department of Commerce informed
potential purchasers of machinery for use in Southeast Asia that “One of the
most common errors made in selecting machinery for Asia is in connection
with labor-saving devices. It is felt that labor is so cheap that it need not be
saved. . . . Because of the extreme inefficiency of Asiatic labor, well-in-
formed buyers will invest heavily in labor-saving devices.”4 A 1929 report on
the Indian industry in the Journal of the Textile Institute states baldly that
“India is obliged to engage three persons in place of one employed in the
Lancashire mills.”5 In 1930 Arno Pearse, the international textile expert, of-
fered  the opinion that “Labour in India is undoubtedly on a very low par,
probably it comes next to Chinese labour in inefficiency, wastefulness, and
lack  of discipline.”6

Although the disparities in performance across countries remained un-
changed, the “labor quality” explanation disappeared from the economics
literature after World War II. Most economists now attribute the poor per-
formance of industry in underdeveloped economies not to labor problems
but to a generalized failure by management to productively employ all the
inputs in production—capital and raw materials as well as labor. Unskilled

2. Stuart, 1902.

3. See, for example, Brassey, 1879, 157–96; Jeans, 1884, 623–24; Schulze-Gaevernitz, 1895,

85–130.

4. Rastall, 1922, 71.

5. Cotton Yarn Association, 1929, T11.

6. Pearse, 1930, 188.

354  chat R 7 


B


United States

A                 C

India

Labor per unit of output

Figure 7. Production choices in the United States and India.

labor is assumed to be of the same quality everywhere.7 Managers, however,
differ from country to country, with the poorest countries having the least
effective management.

Why then is output per machine-hour the same across economies while
output per worker is much lower in low-wage countries? According to the mod-
ern view two circumstances coincide in poor economies. The first is that, be-
cause managers were, and are, deficient in low-wage economies they employ
both more capital and more labor per unit of output than are required in the
advanced economies. This is shown in figure 17.1. The vertical axis shows the
capital used per unit of output, the horizontal axis, the labor employed. To pro-
duce a unit of output there will typically be many possible choices of capital and
labor inputs per unit, a range of choices shown in the figure as the curve run-
ning through point A. By using more capital, some labor can be saved, and vice
versa. For example, in ring spinning, if the speed of the machines is reduced, the

7. See, for example, Pack, 1987.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?  355


capital input per unit of output increases. But since at lower speeds there are
fewer thread breakages, some labor in repairing these is saved.

A country with less-effective management will also face a trade-off be-
tween capital and labor in production. But this trade-off will lie farther from
the origin in figure 17.1, as at point B. For any given ratio of capital to labor,
the country with less-effective management needs more of both inputs. In
cotton spinning, for example, if the raw cotton is not blended correctly the
breakage rates in spinning will be higher, reducing output both per worker and
per unit of capital. With ineffective management machines will break down
more often, idling both capital and labor.

There is, however, a second circumstance in low-wage economies. Man-
agers there are encouraged by the low wages to substitute labor for capital. For
them labor is cheap and capital relatively expensive. So, in the ring spinning
case, they will be encouraged to speed up machines and employ more labor
to fix the resultant breaks. Thus managers in low-wage economies like India,
faced with very cheap labor, rationally choose to use the combination of cap-
ital and labor represented by point C.

To see how this process operates in practice consider weavers assigned to
looms. If there were one weaver per loom, as in India in 1910, then, whenever
the loom ran out of weft thread or a warp thread broke, the worker could im-
mediately fix the problem. Thus there should have been a high level of out-
put per unit of capital. If, as in the United States, each worker tended eight
looms, then it would typically take some time for the loom to be put back
into service after the weft ran out or the warp broke. For the weaver was not
constantly watching each loom but was instead often busy repairing one of
the other looms. Here output per worker should have been high, but output
per machine would have been low.

The modern view of the cotton textile industry is that the low wage costs
in poor countries led managers to add so much more labor per machine that
they were able to raise output per machine back up to the level of the ad-
vanced economies despite their general inefficiency. But they did so at the
expense of further reducing output per worker.

Capital required per unit of output is driven up by managerial ineffi-
ciencies, but then driven down again by substituting cheap labor for capital.
On balance the effects cancel out. In contrast labor required per unit of out-
put is driven up by managerial inefficiencies, but then driven up again by
substituting cheap labor for capital.

356  chat R 7 


For this explanation of the observed international patterns of capital and
labor productivities to work, there has to be plenty of room for substitution
of capital and labor in production.8

We thus have two competing visions of the economic problems inherent
in production in poor countries. The nineteenth-century view blamed these
on the quality of workers, whereas according to the twentieth-century view
the problem lay in managerial failings. If all we have are records of output,
labor and capital from each industry then we cannot argue for one view over
the other, since they are at this level observationally equivalent.

But in the case of the international textile industry, for which we have
much more evidence on management, equipment, and labor assignments, it
becomes apparent that the nature of the labor force was the key issue limiting
efficiency in low-wage economies.

Management in Low-Wage Economies

Did poor countries suffer from poor management? Managers, like machines,
can be imported into low-wage economies if the local supply is deficient.
This was particularly easy in the cotton textile industry since cotton mills
had a relatively flat managerial structure. The managers oversaw the purchase
of the cotton, set the machines for the type of output to be produced, and su-
pervised the workers. But since the workers had, as noted above, well-defined
tasks whose completion was easy to check, supervision should have required
only modest amounts of time.

In the cotton textile industry around 1910, when the international dif-
ferences in staffing levels were already very clear, Britain not only exported
machines, it also exported large numbers of managers and skilled workmen to
foreign mills. Brazil, China, India, Mexico, and Russia all had significant
numbers of British managers around 1910.9 In 1895 there were fifty-five mills
in Bombay, twenty-seven with British managers. In these mills there were 190
deputy managers who supervised the loom sheds, the spinning and carding
rooms, and the steam machinery, of whom 77 were British.10

8. For the process to produce the observed effects production processes must follow the
Cobb-Douglass production function (see chapter 7).

9. Clark, 1987a.

10. Rutnagur, 1927.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?  357


Similarly at least a third of the Chinese industry was under British man-
agement in 1915, and some of the mills owned by Chinese entrepreneurs were
operated by British mill managers. Most Brazilian mills had British managers,
room bosses, and engineers. Unless there was a selection process (for which there
would have been no economic rationale), according to which only the least
competent British managers went to the lowest-wage economies, those with
the intermediate competence went to middle-wage societies, and the best
stayed in the high-income economies, management cannot have been the issue.
In places like Bombay the industry was highly competitive. Table 16.4
showed that profit rates in the industry, even in the growth years 1907–
24, were modest. Managers were thus under constant pressure to improve
the efficiency of their mills. Thus in 1925, of eighty-five cotton mills in Bom-
bay, forty-five had failed and been reconstituted under new management at
some point in their history, while sixteen others had transferred managerial
control voluntarily.11 There is no sign of any obvious managerial failings per-
sisting in the industry, such as choosing the wrong types of machinery, the

wrong scale of production, or the wrong level of vertical integration.12

Substitution Possibilities

The modern view of excess labor in factories, mills, and railways in poor coun-
tries depends on management choosing to substitute labor for capital. But there
are some tasks in cotton mills for which such substitution is not possible, and
so the staffing levels should be much closer to, or even be the same as, those
in high-wage economies.

One such task is doffing. Doffers remove the full spindles of yarn at set
intervals from the spinning machines. The machines must be stopped while
the doffing is in progress, so all four hundred or so spindles on a frame are
doffed at the same time. In India in the 1930s and 1940s machines spinning
standard yarn would be doffed once every three hours. Since it took about 3.3
seconds to doff each spindle, if only one person were to doff the entire frame,
the spindles would be stopped for doffing for 20 minutes out of each 200, or
10 percent of the total running time. To avoid this down time doffing was per-

11. The first mill was built in 1856, but the industry began to grow strongly only in the

1880s; Rutnagur, 1927.

12. Wolcott and Clark, 1999.

358  chat R 7 


Table 7. Doffs per Hour, United States, Britain, and India
Year      United States    Britain    India

1907         —        —      102

1921         728        —      118

1944–49       770       462      124

1959        1,000        —       —

1969         —        600      —

1978         —        —      160

1996         —        —      319

Sources: Clark, 1907; Shirras, 1923; Cotton Spinning Productivity
Team, 1951; Textile Council, 1969; Ratnam and Rajamanickam, 1980;

Doraiswamy, 1983; Rajamanickam and Ranganathan, 1997, 2.

Note: Figures in italics are doffing rates inferred from the number
of spindles per doffer or the number of pounds doffed per hour per
doffer.

formed by specialized teams of doffers, and this practice reduced the doffing
time per frame to 2–4 minutes, only 1–2 percent of the running time.13

Table 17.1 shows doffers’ work rates per hour in the United States, Britain,
and India over the years 1907–96. The Indian doffing rates are extraordinarily
low all the way from 1907 to 1978, and they show very limited improvement
by 1996. In the 1940s Indian doffing rates were 16 percent of U.S. rates. If we
use time and motion estimates of the tasks performed by ring spinners, then
given the staffing levels in India in the 1920s workers were working only 18–23
percent of the time.14

Why Is Labor Quality So Low in Poor Economies?

While it seems clear from the above that the cause of the overstaffing in poor
countries resides principally in the workers, explaining why so many surplus
workers are employed in production in low-wage economies is not easy. Even

13. In Japan in 1929 Pearse describes doffing squads of five to eight workers who would
doff a frame in about one minute. In India in 1930 the doffing of the whole frame seems to
have taken longer (two to three minutes), but we do not know the size of the gangs; Pearse,
1929, 55, 65; Pearse, 1930, 129, 133, 138.

14. Wolcott and Clark, 1999, 400.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?  359


in cases for which we have considerable information, such as the textile mills
of Bombay from 1890 to 1938, an explanation is not obvious. Bombay mill
workers seemingly worked at low intensity and in a slapdash manner, so that
employers were forced to assign many workers per machine to achieve full
output from their invested capital.

The managers in Bombay in the 1920s knew that, by the standards of
Britain and the United States, their mills were overstaffed. And after 1924 the
industry was under severe stress, with many mills suffering losses. Why didn’t
they get rid of the excess workers?

The proximate answer is that reducing staffing had no benefits in terms
of costs and profits. Some firms did move aggressively to reduce staff levels
in the 1920s and 1930s. But these firms’ profits were no higher than those of
the firms that took no such steps. There was no obvious market signal that this
was the right direction in which to move.

We can divide the firms into two groups—the rationalizers, who made

some significant reduction in the numbers of workers per machine during the
interval 1924–38, and the non-rationalizers, who did not change worker num-
bers. On average the rationalizers reduced worker numbers by 35 percent. But
in 1935–38 the average gross profit rate of the rationalizers was 1.7 percent,
while that of the non-rationalizers was 2.0 percent. There was nothing in the
experience of the Bombay industry to suggest that shedding surplus labor led
to higher profits.

Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing was the most profitable of the ratio-
nalizers. But its average profit rate for 1935–38 was still only 6 percent. Even
this mill was not a great success, at least in the eyes of its managers. Accord-
ing to the minutes of the meetings of its board of directors, the profits of the
company were sufficient to induce replacement of some worn-out equipment.
Between 1930 and 1938 the board authorized average annual expenditures on
equipment of 374,469 rupees, approximately 1.3 percent of the value of their
fixed capital stock. But on a net basis the number of their spindles and looms
declined. And during these years the board also authorized large investments
of profits in government bonds. By 1938 the market value of the company’s
government bonds was 8 million rupees—an amount sufficient to extend
their capital stock by 25 percent, had they regarded investment in the cotton
industry as profitable.15

15. Wolcott and Clark, 1999, 409.

360  chat R 7 


Shedding labor did not increase profits mainly because firms which shed
workers paid higher wages to the remaining workers. Thus in 1935–37 the av-
erage day wage in rationalized mills was 1.26 rupees compared to 1.11 rupees
for non-rationalized mills. This disparity was entirely a creation of the rational-
ization process. From 1924 to 1935–38 rationalized mills’ nominal day wages
fell  6 percent, while non-rationalized mills’ wages fell 21 percent. Furthermore,
the increase in machinery could not be simply foisted upon the workers. Prepa-
rations were undertaken to minimize the effort requirements per machine,
despite the apparently minimal tasks of the workers before rationalization.
There were also ongoing costs. These included better machine maintenance
and better cotton quality, both improvements designed to reduce the break-
age rate.

In a competitive labor market workers can be employed under terms that
would imply different levels of effort per hour. Firms that demand greater
effort will have to pay higher wages. Thus it could well be that firms in Bom-
bay had on average chosen the optimal wage-effort combination, given the
capacities and inclinations of the workers. Those that tried to extract more
effort from their workers had to pay more to retain them.

It was claimed by many observers, for example, that the reason for low
labor productivity in places like Bombay was that Indian workers clung to out-
dated work norms, such as one worker per side of a ring frame. Thus “Before
independence, work allocation was purely on an ad hoc basis and was de-
pendent  on the tradition of that particular region. If a worker attended to 200
spindles in one mill, he did the same in all the mills in the locality.”16

But if labor resistance based on outdated work norms in the declining
center of Bombay was the problem, rationalizing managers would have had
enormous incentive to move to new locations. The day wages of workers were
generally cheaper outside the established textile centers. In fact, there was
significant growth in the interwar period in such places as Cawnpor, Coim-
batore, Delhi, Madras, and Nagpur. But while employment and the amount
of machinery in place expanded in these cities, productivity remained at its
prewar levels. If staffing levels in the main centers of the industry were purely
conventional, why did the managers of new mills in isolated locations not
train   their workers to operate eight hundred spinning spindles each, as should
have been feasible?

16. Sreenivasan, 1984, 172.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?   36


Manufacturers were clear in their belief that light assignments were made
for fear of reduced output per machine if workers looked after more ma-
chines. Thus one manufacturer testified to the Factory Commission in 1908
that “They had one man to each loom, because if they gave two looms to one
man it would mean a loss of three-eighths of the loom’s capacity. They would
prefer to stop a loom altogether rather than hand it over to a man working
another loom.”17

The Buckingham and Carnatic mills in Madras, one of the largest and
most profitable textile enterprises in India, introduced automatic looms in the
1920s. The staffing of ordinary looms at this time in India was still often one
worker per loom, compared to one worker per eight looms in the United States.
There would be twenty to thirty automatic looms per worker in the United
States, but only three automatic looms were assigned to each weaver in the
Buckingham and Carnatic mills. Since the looms were new to the workers,
since  they had no reason to expect a level of three looms per weaver any more
than ten looms per weaver, if the previous staffing limitation had been based
solely on convention—why not choose this moment to establish a more profit-
able convention?

Another sign that outdated work norms were not the problem was that
between 1890 and 1929 the managers of Indian mills moved toward purchas-
ing new machines that used less labor. One way of using less labor was to
make the input and output packages larger so that they had to be changed less
often. Thus the average size of the output bobbins spinning 20s yarn went up
from 14 cubic inches circa 1890 to 16 cubic inches circa 1929. Similarly the av-
erage size of the input bobbins on 20s yarn moved up from 80 cubic inches
circa 1890 to 115 cubic inches circa 1929. Managers were choosing machines
that occupied more floor space but saved on labor. Why would they do this if
they were constrained to have a fixed number of spindles per worker?

It is clear from the detailed experience of the Bombay industry in the 1920s
and 1930s that problems in the employment of labor were the key difficulty.
A further sign that there really were differences in the attitudes and behaviors
of Indian workers compared to workers in high-wage economies was the con-
ditions of employment in Indian mills.

The cotton mills in England were noted for the early introduction of strict
systems of factory discipline. Workers, even those who were on piece rates,

17. Parliamentary Papers, 1909b, 315.

362  chat R 7 


were expected to appear at opening time each morning, to work all the hours
the mill was open, to stay at their own machines, and to refrain from social-
izing at work.18 Indian mills by comparison were undisciplined. This lack of
discipline and high absenteeism continued at least into the 1960s.

The Indian Factory Labour Commission report of 1909 is full of testi-
mony by employers regarding conditions in the mills. A substantial fraction
of workers were absent on any given day, and those at work were often able to
come and go from the mill at their pleasure to eat or to smoke. Other work-
ers would supervise their machines while they were gone, and indeed some
manufacturers alleged that the workers organized an informal shift system
among themselves. The mill yards would have eating places, barbers, drink
shops, and other facilities to serve the workers taking a break.19 Some mothers
allegedly brought their children with them to the mills. Workers’ relatives
would bring food to them inside the mill during the day. “There was an utter
lack of supervision in the Bombay mills.” One manager even stated that the
typical worker “washes, bathes, washes his clothes, smokes, shaves, sleeps, has
his food, and is surrounded as a rule by his relations.”20

There are few reliable estimates of the fraction of time workers were ab-
sent from their machines: the manufacturers put the figure at 10–30 percent
of total work time. To partially control this absenteeism some employers used
a pass system, under which a worker could leave the mill only with a pass or
token from his or her department. Each department was allotted passes equal
to 10–25 percent of the staff. But workers sometimes successfully resisted even
this modest control.21

This lack of discipline persisted throughout the free market period of the
industry under the British until 1947, and probably beyond. Thus R.K.P.
Mody, a lecturer at the Victoria Jubilee Textile Institute in Bombay who had
worked in both English and Indian mills, in a 1951 article giving “practical
hints to jobbers [room bosses],” assumes that even a good jobber will allow
workers to leave the mill rooms during work, as long as they have tokens.22

Mody condemns—but apparently recognizes as common—supervision
practices that allowed workers to go out without tokens in groups of two or

18. Clark, 1994.

19. Parliamentary Papers, 1909b, 111, 170; Morris, 1965, 114–15.

20. Parliamentary Papers, 1909b, 21, 27, 78, 111, 204; quotations on pages 111 and 204.

21. Ibid., 25, 35, 72, 111, 139, 148–49, 170, 181, 197, 200.

22. Mody, 1951.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?  363


Table 7.2

Absenteeism in Indian Mills, 1965

Urban    Rural

Period                         (%)      (%)

Average (1955)                     8.0      5.7

Average                        10.6      8.9

First day after wage payment              11.0      6.1

Second day after wage payment            10.8      —

Third day after wage payment             10.2      —
First six days after twice-yearly bonus payment     12.4      7.7

First day after a holiday                10.5      7.9

Source: Rudraswamy, 1957, 1967.

more, “leaving machines and other work unattended.” He also criticizes the
customs of allowing workers to read newspapers inside departments, allowing
them to sleep inside departments, and allowing children within the depart-
ments.23 By the mid-nineteenth century in England no textile mill would
have allowed any of these practices.

Absenteeism was still common as late as the 1960s. In 1939–44 daily
absenteeism in Bombay averaged 10.7 percent, and in Ahmedabad, 4.5 per-
cent.24 Table 17.2 summarizes a study of sixteen South Indian mills which
found high absenteeism rates that were apparently tolerated by mills in the
1950s and 1960s. In 1955, for example, 7 percent of the workers were absent
for 25 percent or more of the work days. Absenteeism also increased on days
after wage payments, on days after bonus payments, and on days after holi-
days. Yet management continued to employ such workers, even though a rel-
atively small and identifiable group was responsible for many of the days lost
from work.

This irregularity was not solely a product of the annual movement of
workers back to their villages at the wedding season or for harvest. Mills
often had formal leave systems that covered such occasions. Instead there was
considerable day-to-day absenteeism.

23. Mody, 1951, 720.

24. Deshpande, 1946, 8.

364  chat R 7 


Many mills made attempts to limit absenteeism, but by rather weak
methods. Thus the rules of the Madura Mill Company in 1946 specified that
any worker who was absent from the mill without permission for eight days
or more was subject to suspension or dismissal.25 More commonly the mills
relied on modest bonuses offered to workers for good attendance.

Beyond their relatively liberal attitude toward absences, Indian mills even
allowed workers to effectively subcontract their work for periods where they
were absent. At least in the 1920s weavers in Bombay, a relatively skilled group
of workers, were allowed to hire their own substitutes (badlis).26 The weavers
were paid on piece rates, so they would get the payment for whatever output
the substitute produced. The substitute was paid by the weaver with no inter-
vention or supervision by the firm.27

The evidence presented above strongly supports the idea that labor prob-
lems were at the root of India’s failure to industrialize under British rule in
1857–1947 and subsequently under independent Indian governments. The
socially induced lethargy that afflicted Indian labor may have extended
throughout the society: had the deficiency been limited to the ranks of Indian
managers and entrepreneurs, these inputs could have been relatively easily im-
ported, as we saw in chapter 15 in the case of the Sassoon family enterprises.

Why Divergence?

If the fundamental cause of the income differences between economies is vari-
ation in the quality of the labor force across those economies, then why are
the differences in income today so much greater than in 1800? After all, the
variation in social capabilities between societies now is presumably no greater
than  it was in 1800.

There are three reasons why the same differences across societies now
would lead to far greater divergence in income per person—the so-called Great
Divergence.

The first is that in the preindustrial world, because of the Malthusian
Trap, differences in labor effectiveness had no consequences for the average

25. Deshpande, 1946, 8.

26. Newman, 1981.

27. In some of the firms there does seem to have been a limit on how many consecutive
days a badli could be employed by a weaver.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?  365


level of output per person across societies. Leisurely societies were just as well
off as hard-working ones. Since the Industrial Revolution income per person
has no longer been constrained by Malthusian mechanisms. So existing differ-
ences in capabilities between societies could now express themselves through
income per person rather than population densities. The escape from the
Malthusian era is one factor in the Great Divergence.

The second is that modern medicine has substantially reduced the sub-
sistence wage in such areas as tropical Africa, allowing populations to con-
tinue growing at incomes which are substantially below the average of the
preindustrial world. Even at wages that were low by preindustrial standards
life expectancy in some of the poorest countries in Africa is still above the
average preindustrial level.

The third reason, more tentatively, is that the new production techniques
introduced since the Industrial Revolution have raised the wage premium for
high-quality labor.28 In the preindustrial world production processes tended
to   be “shallow,” meaning that they did not involve a large number of steps. In
addition they were typically tolerant of error and inattention along the way.
Consider the production of wheat in preindustrial agriculture. The ground
was plowed, the seed sown, the grain reaped, and finally it was threshed
and winnowed. If too much seed was sown then some of it was lost; if too
little, then some land input was not fully utilized. If the threshing was done
poorly then some grain remained with the straw, which in any case was fed
to the farm animals, so only part of the value was lost. But errors or poor per-
formance at each step of the process tended to have only modest costs.

Poland in the early nineteenth century, for example, was a major supplier
of wheat to Britain, and so its agricultural practices were of interest to the
British. The Englishman William Jacob, who made an inspection tour of Pol-
ish farms in the 1820s, noted the generally poor performance of agricultural
workers there. Of threshers he states, “a much greater proportion of the grain
was left among the straw, than in that which has passed under an English
flail.” His data implied that Polish threshers, even with less care, threshed
only half as much per day as English threshers. The grain exported from east-
ern Europe was also imperfectly winnowed, and it had to be rescreened on
arrival to exclude large amounts of foreign material.29 The grain from the

28. This idea is due to Kremer, 1993a.

29. Clark, 1987b, 425, 427.

366  chat R 7 


Step 1

Step 2

Step n

Success Rate   (1 - p)    ×    (1 - p)   × ……………………×   (1 - p)  = (1 - p) ⁿ

Figure 7.2 A modern production process?

interior of Poland was floated down to the Baltic Sea on wooden barges un-
protected from the rain and sun, so that by the time it arrived the top layer
would have sprouted and begun to grow. This sprouted layer was simply
peeled off on arrival.

The production system was fairly tolerant to the slapdash work ethic of
the Polish workers. If threshers did not work hard, more could be added to
complete the task. If the grain was not winnowed well, it could be screened
further. If some grain sprouted, it could be discarded.

But the new technologies of the Industrial Revolution involved a more
extensive division of labor and were less tolerant of errors along the way. In
pottery factories in Britain by the nineteenth century, for example, there were
twenty-nine different steps in the division of labor. In making cups the four-
teenth  was attaching the handle.30 If this was not done correctly, then the
finished cup was worthless. There could be no rescreening as with Polish
wheat. In such a situation, Kremer argues, mistakes by the labor force will
have a multiplicative effect.31 As portrayed in figure 17.2, if there is a chance
p  of a mistake in each of n steps in the production process, and each is fatal to
producing a saleable product, then the chance of getting a saleable product
will be (1 – p)n. If, for example, the chance of a failure at each stage in the pot-
tery works was p = 0.1, and there were 29 stages, then the fraction of success-
ful cups made would be 0.05.

In this situation manufacturers might find the current African labor force,
even offered at extremely low wages, not cost effective. Or, when confronted
with a workforce with low work rates or high error rates, manufacturers might
find it cost effective to add more workers at each stage of the process in order
to ensure workflow and prevent errors. This could lead to the situation found
in the empirical results of chapter 16: large amounts of extra labor in low-wage

30. Clark, 1994, 153–54.

31. Kremer, 1993a.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?  367


Table 7.3 Cloth Production in India by Sector, 1900–98

(square meters)

Decentralized

Year       Mill     power loom     Handloom

1900–03      483         0         793

1936–39     3,630         0        1,420

1980–81     4,533       4,802        3,109

1997–98     1,948      20,951        7,603

Sources: Mazumdar, 1984, 7, 36; Office of the Textile Commissioner, 1997,

1998.

countries, but the same output per unit of capital as in the richer countries.
Workers are given extremely easy work assignments in order to minimize the
chance of mistakes.

Technology in successful, high-income economies thus evolves toward
production processes that, developed in the work environments of these
economies, give a high premium to regular and meticulous completion of
work tasks. In economies in which the labor force is more relaxed and less dis-
ciplined, these technologies can only be utilized with extravagant amounts of
extra labor to compensate for the characteristics of the labor force.

A further empirical implication of this idea would be that the productiv-
ity of modern techniques compared to their handicraft precursors would be
much less in low-wage economies.

India, for example, has seen an extraordinary persistence of handlooms in
the textile weaving sector. By the 1830s in England handloom weaving of cot-
tons had largely been superseded by power looms in factories, even though the
wages of handloom workers were only about half those of factory workers.32
Yet some 175 years later the handloom sector in India is still large, particularly
in cottons. Indeed the output of the handloom sector has grown steadily since
statistics were first gathered in 1900. In 1997–98, as table 17.3 shows, output
of woven cloth from handlooms in India was about ten times that in 1900. In
1997–98 25 percent of cloth production in India was still from handlooms.

32. Bythell, 1969.

368  chat R 7 


Cloth production in India is in fact divided into three segments: the mill
sector, consisting of large power loom plants as in the United States; the de-
centralized power loom sector, consisting of workshops of one to fifty power
looms outside the formal regulation of the mill sector; and the handloom
sector, consisting of looms in houses and workshops. The survival of the
handloom industry in India is often attributed to government protection.
Since independence the government has levied excise taxes on mill output
while keeping the handloom sector tax free. Thus even in 1997–98 most fab-
rics were subject to an excise duty of 10–20 percent, but handloom cloth was
still exempt. However, the decentralized power loom sector has largely avoided
paying these excise taxes.33 So the tax advantages serve mainly to explain
why smaller power loom operations could outcompete large mills. They do
not explain why handlooms can still compete against untaxed power loom
operations. Power looms produce 2.5 times the hourly output of handlooms,
and   one weaver should be able to operate between four and eight power looms
at a time, based on labor requirements in Britain and the United States circa
1900. Day wages per worker in the handloom and power loom sectors are about
the same, implying that power loom labor costs per meter of cloth should be
5–10 percent of handloom labor costs. Since capital costs for power looms per
meter of cloth are estimated to be only about 20 percent higher than those for
handlooms, interest rates would have to be extraordinarily high before hand-
looms  had any cost advantage.

But in practice power looms in India require much more labor than even
machine-powered looms in England in the nineteenth century. Power loom
weavers typically supervise only 1.5 looms each.34 This level of staffing dras-
tically reduces the labor cost advantages of the power loom. The high staffing
levels for power looms might be explained by the low wages of the operators,
but Indian wages now are as high or higher than those in England in the 1830s,
when a more primitive power loom easily swept aside the competition of
handlooms.

The competitive advantage of the handloom in modern India is consis-
tent with the idea that differences in labor quality are more significant when
more modern technologies are in use.

33. Misra, 1993, 89–119.

34. Mazumdar, 1984, 93.

wh s ’ t th whol w o RL   vl o ?  369


Why the Differences in Labor Quality?

Regarding the underlying cause of the differences in labor quality, there is no
satisfactory theory. Economies seem, to us, to alternate more or less randomly
between relatively energetic phases and periods of somnolence. We saw above
that India experienced declining income relative to the United States and the
United Kingdom for 120 years since 1870. Recently—coinciding with modest
economic reforms that did no more than partially return its economy to the
free-market period of British rule—the country began to grow again. But
growth in India is actually confined to only select states, including Gujarat,
Maharashtra, and the Punjab. Others within the same political framework,
such as Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, have continued to perform poorly. British
income relative to France and Germany declined substantially from 1950 to
1980, but it has since returned to equality. Ireland, whose income per person
was only about two-thirds that of Britain from 1800 to 1980, has since then
seen its per capita income grow to one of the highest in Europe, exceeding
that of Britain. New Zealand in the past twenty years has seen significant
slippage in its income relative to other OECD countries.

This pattern of alternating periods of energy and somnolence extends
far back in history. The Golden Age of the Netherlands in 1550–1650, for ex-
ample, was followed by 150 years of economic stagnation. William Jacob, in
his accounts of his tour of eastern Europe in 1826, remarked on the low en-
ergy of even free laborers: “some rare instances of perseverance in economy,
industry and temperance, are to be found.”35 It is only the magnitude of the
swings, the reversals in fortune, that seem greater in the post-Malthusian world.

35. Jacob, 1826, 65.

370  chat R 7 


8  Conclusion: Strange New World

All Nature wears one universal grin.       —Henry Fielding (1731)1

God clearly created the laws of the economic world in order to have a little
fun at economists’ expense. In other areas of inquiry, such as the physical sci-
ences, there has been a steady accumulation of knowledge over the past four
hundred years. Earlier theories proved inadequate. But those that replaced
them encompassed the earlier theories and gave practitioners greater ability to
predict outcomes across a wider range of conditions. In economics, however,
we  see instead that our ability to describe and predict the economic world
reached a peak around 1800. In the years since the Industrial Revolution there
has been a progressive and continuing disengagement of economic models
from any ability to predict differences of income and wealth across time and
across countries and regions. Before 1800 living conditions differed substan-
tially across societies, but the Malthusian model developed within classical
economics successfully analyzes the sources of these differences. We know
how climate, disease, natural resources, technology, and fertility shaped ma-
terial living conditions. The Malthusian era described in chapters 1–9 is thus,
though counterintuitive, perfectly comprehensible. Differences in social energy
across societies, which have probably existed for all time, were translated by the
Malthusian mechanism into variations in population density. In economics
the known world thus stretches from the original foragers of the African sa-
vannah until 1800.

1. Fielding, 1731, 2.

37


Since then economics has become more professional. Graduate pro-
grams have expanded, pouring out a flood of talented economists armed with
an ever more sophisticated array of formal models and statistical methods.
But since the Industrial Revolution we have entered a strange new world in
which the rococo embellishments of economic theory help little in under-
standing the pressing questions that the ordinary person asks of economics:
Why are some rich and some poor? In the future will we all be among the
lucky? In this book I have suggested ways in which the Malthusian era,
through differential survival of individuals, can predict success or failure for
modern societies, and also predicts a continuing future of economic growth.
But even if that hypothesis is correct, it still leaves unexplained much of the
variation in modern incomes across countries. In the modern world local
social interactions that determine the attitudes of people toward work, and
cooperation in work, are magnified by the economic system to generate un-
precedented extremes of wealth and poverty.

Our economic world is one that the deluge of economics journal articles,
working papers, and books—devoted to ever more technically detailed studies
of capital markets, trade flows, tax incidence, sovereign borrowing risk, cor-
ruption indices, rule of law—serves more to obscure than to illuminate. For the
economic history of the world constructed in these pages is largely innocent
of  these traditional staples of the discipline. The great engines of economic
life in the sweep of history—demography, technology, and labor efficiency—
seem uncoupled from these quotidian economic concerns. (And of course it
is another divine irony that it is in precisely this world, where the bulk of the
activity of economists has the least value for the material fate of mankind,
that the combination of ever more rigorous training, limiting supply, and a
booming demand for economists from business schools, central banks, and
international agencies has driven up the salaries of even academic economists
to unprecedented levels.)2

The modern age began with the conquests by the Europeans of the fif-
teenth century and later. The newly discovered societies of Africa, America,
and the Pacific sought in vain to stem the invasions of the Europeans. The
obsidian blades of the Aztecs were no match for Spanish steel, the war clubs
of  the Maori of no avail against British muskets, the mud walls of Timbuktu

2. The University of California, Davis, seems to be the sole exception to this salary
inflation.

372  chat R 8 


scant bulwark against French artillery. There followed the great age of impe-
rialism, when Westerners imposed themselves in all corners of the globe. For a
while the West conquered all. It shaped the political geography of much of the
world; it transplanted Africans and Asians to different continents. Territory,
technology, music, culture: as a consequence of the Industrial Revolution the
West seemed to have it all.

But a visitor to the planet, innocent of its history, might have a very dif-
ferent impression. For such a visitor would see, ringing the modern West, a
series of fortifications protecting it from invasion by the poor societies of
South America, Africa, and South Asia. In the Mediterranean and South At-
lantic naval patrols try to intercept desperate boatloads of migrants headed to
the glittering cities of Europe. The U.S.-Mexico border is increasingly lined
with rusting iron battlements, walls of concrete, and fences of wire. In the
gaps, across the harsh Sonoran Desert, a trail of empty plastic gallon jugs de-
marcates the march of an invading army of desperately poor migrants from El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico. Patrols in the Caribbean inter-
cept sailing boats packed with Haitians trying to escape the violence and filth
of Cité Soleil.

History shows, as we have seen repeatedly in this book, that the West has
no model of economic development to offer the still-poor countries of the
world. There is no simple economic medicine that will guarantee growth,
and even complicated economic surgery offers no clear prospect of relief for
societies afflicted with poverty. Even direct gifts of aid have proved ineffective
in stimulating growth.3 In this context the only policy the West could pursue
that will ensure gains for at least some of the poor of the Third World is to
liberalize immigration from these countries. We know a good deal about the
economic consequences for migrants from the historical record of countries
like Britain, the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, which
had large flows of immigrants in the modern era. That record shows that mi-
grants, particularly those from very-low-income countries, have been able to
achieve enormous income gains through migration.4 Aid to the Third World
may disappear into the pockets of Western consultants and the corrupt rulers
of these societies. But each extra migrant admitted to the emerald cities of the
advanced world is one more person guaranteed a better material lifestyle.

3. Easterly, 2006.

4. See Clark, 1987a, table 8, for example.

c oclUS o   373


Another irony is that the achievement of mass affluence in much of the
world—the decline in child mortality, the extension of adult life spans, and
the reduction in inequality—have not made us any happier than our hunter-
gatherer forebears. While I have emphasized that income alone has been a
profound shaper of how we live in the modern world, the one thing that
income has not brought is happiness.

The evidence on this issue is simple. It consists solely of questionnaires put
to people, both within individual societies over time and across societies, ask-
ing them how happy they are or how satisfied they are with their lives. This
may seem an absurdly crude tool with which to measure happiness, but how
else would we assess such a thing? And responses to such questionnaires within
any society correlate well with characteristics we expect to be associated with
happiness. In western Europe and the United States the married, the rich (in-
cluding recent lottery winners), the healthier, the employed, the educated, and
the thin all report greater happiness. The divorced and separated, the wid-
owed, the poor, the less healthy, the unemployed, the uneducated, and the fat
are less happy.5 Furthermore, people who report greater happiness demon-
strate physical correlates within the brain: more electrocortical activity in the
left prefrontal cortex than in the right.6

Within any society the association between income and happiness is
strong. Ranking by income per person, the top 10 percent in income is the
happiest group, and the bottom 10 percent is the least happy.7

The association of income with happiness observed within societies
might lead us to believe naïvely that another profound effect of the Industrial
Revolution was to spread happiness and good cheer around the globe. Un-
fortunately there is little evidence of gains in happiness from gains in income,
life expectancy, or health by societies as a whole. This can be observed in two
ways. First, for some societies, such as Japan and the United States, we have
survey measures of happiness that extend back over fifty years or more, a period

5. Easterlin, 2003; Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004, tables 4–7; Gardner and Oswald,
2007, table 2; Oswald and Powdthavee, 2007, tables 1–3. It must be noted that the amount of
variation in reported happiness explained by all such observable features of people’s lives is
small, typically less than 5 percent. Thus the rich are happier than the poor on average, but
many poor people are much happier than the average rich person, and many rich people are
more miserable than the average poor person.

6. Kahneman et al., 2004, 429.

7. See, for example, Frey and Stutzer, 2002, table 1.

374  chat R 8 


30,000                                           4

25,000

Happiness                                    3

20,000

15,000                                           2


10,000

Income

1

5,000

0                                           0

1958   1963   1968   1973   1978   1983   1988   1993   1998   2003

Figure 8. Average income per capita and average happiness, Japan, 1958–2004. Data from
Veenhoven, 2005, and Heston et al., 2006.

during which these countries became much richer as a result of modern eco-
nomic growth. Yet, as Richard Easterlin first pointed out in 1974, there has
been no increase in average happiness with the growth of incomes.8 Figure

18.1 shows the average reported happiness in Japan from 1958 to 2004, as well
as income per capita measured in prices for the year 2000. Over the nearly
fifty years from 1958 to 2004 income per person rose nearly sevenfold, while
reported happiness, if anything, declined slightly.

The second set of evidence is derived from administration of the same
survey questions across contemporary societies in which average income
varies significantly. People in contemporary countries as poor as those of the
world before 1800 on average report little difference in happiness from those
in very rich countries such as the United States.9 Average happiness at an in-
come level per person of $20,000 and above is only modestly greater than
that at incomes of $4,000 per person and less, the level of hunter-gatherer

8. Easterlin, 1974; Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004.

9. Frey and Stutzer, 2002, 416–17.

c oclUS o   375


societies. At the national level the response of happiness to income is modest
at best.

There has been much discussion of the appropriate interpretation of the
failure of higher income to produce greater happiness over time and across
countries. The key problem here is the ample evidence that our happiness
depends not on our absolute level of well-being, but instead on how we are
doing relative to our reference group. Each individual—by acquiring more
income, by buying a larger house in a nicer neighborhood, by driving a
more elegant car—can make him- or herself happier. But happier only at the
expense of those with less income, meaner housing, and junkier cars. Money
will buy happiness, but that happiness is transferred from someone else, not
added to the common pool.

The finding that relative income is crucial also suggests that the poor
countries of today may not be a good guide to the likely happiness of the
mass of humanity before 1800. These poor nations, through the medium of
television, can witness almost firsthand the riches of successful economies. If
this helps set the point of reference about their economic position for the
people in these poor societies, then possibly there is no absolute effect of in-
come on happiness even at the lowest incomes. That would imply further that
the people of the world of 1800, in which all societies were relatively poor, and
in which communities were much more local, were likely to have been just as
happy as those of the wealthiest nations of the world today, such as the
United States.

Since we are likely mainly the descendants of the strivers of the pre-
industrial world, the people driven to achieve greater economic success than
their peers, these findings perhaps reflect our biological heritage from the
Malthusian era. Perhaps we are not designed to be content, but instead to for-
ever compare our lot with that of our competitors, and to be happy only when
we do better. The contented may simply have died out in the Malthusian era.
Does this imply that the incredible advances in technology over the mil-
lennia, and the consequent gains in income per capita and in general living
conditions, have all been for naught? Some, such as Robert Frank, have ar-
gued that, since the gains in happiness from higher income and consumption
come only at the expense of the reduced happiness of those who lose out in
such status races, much of the energy devoted to achieving higher incomes
in any society is socially wasteful. The rich, the winners of the status races,

376  chat R 8 


should be heavily taxed to reduce such socially costly activity.10 But happiness
studies so far do not support any such policy conclusion. Greater taxation of
the rich might reduce income inequality, but it would not make societies as a
whole happier. We lack trustworthy evidence that societies with greater income
equality are on average happier.

Happiness research does suggest one interesting parallel between taxation
policy in our world and that in the Malthusian era. We saw in chapter 2 that
taxes to fund the wasteful lifestyles of the rulers actually had no social cost in
the Malthusian era. The glories of Versailles were not purchased at the price of
the misery of the poor—whatever public relations problems Marie Antoinette
may have had. Happiness research suggests that the same holds true for the
modern era. If we value such collective goods as scientific research, space travel,
public art, and fine architecture, then we should tax to fund them, whatever
the economic cost. The consequent reduction of our material consumption
will have little psychic cost.

World economic history is thus full of counterintuitive effects, surprises,
and puzzles. It is intertwined with who we are and how our culture was
formed. No one can claim to be truly intellectually alive without having un-
derstood and wrestled, at least a little, with these mysteries—of how we ar-
rived  at our present affluence only after millennia in the wilderness, and of
why it is so hard for many societies to join us in the material Promised Land.

10. Frank, 1999.

c oclUS o   377



Technical Appendix

In this appendix all the formulas used in the book are derived using simple
algebra.

1. The Fundamental Equation of Growth

In all economies, if y is output per person, k capital per person, z land per per-
son, and A the level of efficiency, then

gy = agk + cgz + gA,                       (1)

where gx denotes the growth rate of a variable, a is the share of output paid to
capital owners, and c the share paid to landowners.

To show this assume a general relationship between output and the other
variables of the form

y = AF(k, z).                           (2)

A now is interpreted as measuring how well the economy translates inputs
into output. The exact nature of the function F(k, z) is unspecified, and it
does not need to be.

A small change in efficiency, ΔA, changes output by ΔAF(k, z). Thus a
1 percent increase in efficiency increases output by 1 percent. A small change
in capital per person, Δk, changes output by rΔk, where r is the rental pay-
ment per unit of capital. This is because in a competitive economy the
amount paid to each input equals the amount the last unit used adds to output.

379


Similarly Δz changes output by sΔz, where s is the rental per unit of land.
Adding up these effects, we can divide small changes in output per person into

Δy = rΔk + sΔz +ΔAF(k, z).                   (3)

Dividing both sides of equation (3) by y and rearranging gives

Δy  rk Δk  sz  Δs  ΔAF(k, z)

—– = —– —– + —– —– + ———— ,             (4)

y   y  k   y  s   AF(k, z)

and equation (1) follows from equation (4).

2. Efficiency Growth Rates

Equation (1) implies that we can measure the rate of efficiency growth as

gA = gy – agk – cgz.

Equivalently we can measure efficiency growth as the weighted average rate of
the growth of payments to labor, capital, and land. That is,

gA = agr + bgw + cgs.                       (5)

To derive this note that the value of the output equals the sum of payments
to owners of labor, capital, and land. So

y = w + rk + sz.                         (6)

Equation (6) implies that, again for small changes,

Δy = Δw + Δrk + r Δk + Δsz + sΔz

⇒     Δy – r Δk – s Δz = Δw + Δrk + 
Δsz.

Dividing everything above by y and rearranging gives

Δy  rk Δk  sz  Δs  w Δw  rk Δk  sz  Δs

—– – —– —– – —– —– = — —– + —– —– + —– —–

y   y  k   y  s   y  w   y  k   y  s

⇒         gA = gy – agk – cgz = agr + bgw + cgs .

3. The Fundamental Equation in the Malthusian Economy

Before 1800 we have a special case of equation (1) in which in the long run

gy = gk = 0. In addition gz = –gN , where N is the level of population. Thus if

380  тснсal a x 


population was growing at 1 percent per year then land per person was falling
at this rate. Substituting these values into equation (1) gives, for the long run,

gA = cgN .

Since income per person does not change over the long run in the Mal-
thusian economy, and since to a first approximation wages and the return on
capital should be constant, then equation (5) implies that

gA = cgs .

Hence the growth rate of real land rents in the Malthusian world, absent
changes in real interest rates, should be the same as the growth rate of
population.

4. The Sources of Efficiency Growth

If there are j sectors in an economy, the overall efficiency growth rate of the
economy can be decomposed into the contribution from each sector through
the equation

gA = Σθj gAj ,

where θj is the value of output of sector j relative to the value of all final out-
puts produced in the economy.

/. Modern Growth

In the modern era the share of land rents in national incomes for industrial-
ized economies has declined sharply, to typically 4 percent or less (see figure
10.3). This implies that for the modern era we can simplify the fundamental
equation of growth even further:

gy ≈ agk + gA.

Furthermore, growth in efficiency induces more physical capital investment.
The amount of this induced capital accumulation can be estimated from the
fact that

a = —rk–. 

y

тснсal a x   38


Since in the modern era a has been relatively constant at about 0.25 and the
real interest rate r has also been relatively constant, by implication

gk ≈ gy.

Thus


gy ≈

g

——— .

(1 – a)

In the modern era the products agr and cgs are both close to 0, because gr

and c are each close to 0. Thus

gA ≈ bgw .

Thus almost all the gains from growing efficiency in the modern economy
have flown to wage earners. And we can approximate the rate of efficiency
growth in the modern era just by looking at the growth of real wages.

6. Generalizations

The above results for the sources of growth in per capita income are derived
for an economy with only one output, one type of labor, one type of land,
and one type of capital (which is just stored-up output). But all these results
generalize easily into analogous expressions for an economy with many types
of output, labor, land, and capital. Thus in an economy with i types of out-
put the growth of output becomes

gY = Σθi gYi ,

where θi is the share of the commodity or service i in the value of output. The
growth of the labor input becomes

g = Σ bj g ,

L   — Lj

where bj is the share in the total payments to the factors of production paid to
workers of type j. And the growth of the capital stock is similarly

g = Σ aj g .

K   —a Kj

38  тснсal a x 


References

Abernathy, Frederick H., Anthony Volpe, and David Weil. 2005. “The Apparel and
Textile Industries After 2005: Prospects and Choices for Public and Private Actors.”
Working Paper, Harvard Center for Textile and Apparel Research, Cambridge,
Mass.

Abramovitz, Moses. 1956. “Resource and Output Trends in the United States since

1870.” American Economic Review 46: 5–23.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American
Economic Review 91(5): 1369–1401.

———. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of
the Modern World Income Distribution.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:
1231–1294.

———. 2005a. “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change, and
Economic Growth.” American Economic Review 95(3): 546–579.

———. 2005b. “Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth.” In
Handbook of Economic Growth, eds. Philippe Aghion and Steve Durlauf. Philadel-
phia: Elsevier, pp. 385–471.

A’Hearn, Brian. 2003. “Anthropometric Evidence on Living Standards in Northern
Italy, 1730–1860.” Journal of Economic History 63(2): 351–381.

Alam, M. Shahid. 1987. “Some European Perceptions of Japan’s Work-Ethos in the
Tokugawa Era: A Limited Survey of Observations from the West’s First Encoun-
ters Offers Parallels to Today’s.” American Journal of Economics and Sociology
46(2): 229–243.

Allen, Marion E. 1989. Wills of the Archdeaconry of Suffolk, 1620–24. Woodbridge,
Suffolk, U.K.: Boydell Press.

383


Allen, Robert C. 2001. “The Great Divergence in European Wages and Prices from
the Middle Ages to the First World War.” Explorations in Economic History 38(4):
411–448.

———. 2005. “Capital Accumulation, Technological Change, and the Distribution of
Income during the British Industrial Revolution.” Working Paper, Nuffield Col-
lege, Oxford.

Angel, J. Lawrence. 1971. The People of Lerna: Analysis of a Prehistoric Aegean Popula-

tion. Athens: American School of Classical Studies.

Arnold, A. J., and Sean McCartney. 2005. “Rates of Return, Concentration Levels and
Strategic Change in the British Railway Industry, 1830–1912.” Journal of Trans-
port History 26(1): 41–60.

Austen, Jane. 1957. Sense and Sensibility. New York: Heritage Press.

Bagnall, Roger S., and Bruce W. Frier. 1994. The Demography of Roman Egypt. Cam-
bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Balke, Nathan S., and Robert J. Gordon. 1989. “The Estimation of Prewar Gross Na-
tional Product: Methodology and New Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy
97: 38–92.

Banks, Joseph. 1962. The Endeavour Journal of Joseph Banks, 1768–71, Vol. 1, ed. J. C.
Beaglehole. Sydney: Angus & Robertson.

Bassino, Jean-Pascal, and Debin Ma. 2005. “Japanese Wages in International Perspec-
tive, 1741–1913.” Research in Economic History 23: 229–248.

Beaglehole, John C. 1974. The Life of Captain James Cook. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press.

Becker, Gary. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University

Press.

Becker, Gary, Kevin Murphy, and Robert Tamura. 1990. “Human Capital, Fertility
and Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 98: S12–37.

Bekaert, Geert. 1991. “Calorie Consumption in Industrializing Belgium.” Journal of
Economic History 51(3): 633–655.

Benedict, Carol. 1988. “Bubonic Plague in Nineteenth Century China.” Modern
China 14(2): 107–155.

Bennett, Charles F. 1962. “The Bayano Cuno Indians, Panama: An Ecological Study
of Livelihood and Diet.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 52(1):
32–50.

Bennike, Pia. 1985. Paleopathology of Danish Skeletons. Copenhagen: Akademisk
Forlag.

Bergman, Roland W. 1980. Amazon Economics: The Simplicity of Shipibo Indian

Wealth. Syracuse, N.Y.: Department of Geography, Syracuse University.

Biddick, Kathleen. 1987. “Missing Links: Taxable Wealth, Markets, and Stratification
among Medieval English Peasants.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 18(2):
277–298.

384   R  R cs 


Blainey, Geoffrey. 1975. Triumph of the Nomads: A History of Ancient Australia. Mel-
bourne: Macmillan.

Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew J. Oswald. 2004. “Well-Being over Time in
Britain and the USA.” Journal of Public Economics 88(7–8): 1359–1386.

Blanshei, Sarah R. 1979. “Population, Wealth and Patronage in Medieval and Renais-
sance Perugia.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 9(4): 597–619.

Boag, George L. 1912. Manual of Railway Statistics. London: Railway Gazette.

Boaz, Franz. 1891. “Physical Characteristics of the Indians of the North Pacific Coast.”

American Anthropologist 2(4): 321–328.

———. 1899. “Anthropometry of Shoshonean Tribes.” American Anthropologist New
Series 1(4): 751–758.

Boix, Carles, and Frances Rosenbluth. 2004. “Bones of Contention: The Political
Economy of Height Inequality.” Working Paper, University of Chicago, Depart-
ment  of Political Science.

Borgerhoff-Mulder, Monique. 1987. “On Cultural and Reproductive Success: Kipsigis
Evidence.” American Anthropologist 89: 617–634.

Bougainville, Lewis de. 1772. A Voyage Round the World, trans. John Reinhold Forster.

London: J. Nourse.

Brassey, Thomas. 1879. Foreign Work and English Wages. London: Longmans, Green.
Brennan, Lance, John McDonald, and Ralph Shlomowitz. 1997. “Towards an An-
thropometric History of Indians Under British Rule.” Research in Economic His-

tory 17: 185–246.

Broadberry, Steven, and Bishnupriya Gupta. 2006. “The Early Modern Great Diver-
gence: Wages, Prices and Economic Development in Europe and Asia, 1500–
1800.” Economic History Review 59: 2–31.

Broadberry, S., and D. Irwin. 2004. “Labour Productivity in the US and the U.K.
during the 19th Century.” Discussion Paper 4596. Centre for Economic Policy
Research, London.

Brown, Roger L. 1981. “The Rise and Fall of the Fleet Marriages.” In Marriage and

Society: Studies in the Social History of Marriage, ed. R. B. Outhwaite. London:
Europa Publications, pp. 117–136.

Bruland, Kristine. 1989. British Technology and European Industrialization: The Nor-

wegian Textile Industry in the Mid-Nineteenth Century. Cambridge, U.K.: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Brunt, P. A. 1971. Italian Manpower, ll/ B.C.–ię A.D. London: Oxford University

Press.

Buck, John L. 1930. Chinese Farm Economy. Shanghai: University of Nanking.
Bureau of Railway Economics. 1915. Comparative Railway Statistics: United States and

Foreign Countries, i9il. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Railway Economics.

Burnette, Joyce. 1997. “An Investigation of the Female-Male Wage Gap during the
Industrial Revolution in Britain.” Economic History Review 50(2): 257–281.

R  R cs   385


———. 2006. “How Skilled Were Agricultural Labourers in the Early Nineteenth
Century?” Economic History Review 59(4): 688–716.

Bythell, Duncan. 1969. The Handloom Weavers: A Study in the English Cotton Industry
during the Industrial Revolution. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Campbell, Bruce, James Galloway, Derek Keene, and Margaret Murphy. 1993. A Me-
dieval Capital and Its Grain Supply: Agrarian Production and Distribution in the

London Region c. I300. London: Institute of British Geographers.

Chagnon, Napoleon. 1983. Yanomamo: The Fierce People, 3rd ed. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.

———. 1988. “Life Histories, Blood Revenge, and Warfare in a Tribal Population.”

Science 239: 985–992.

Chibi, Andrew A. 1998. “The Social and Regional Origins of the Henrician Episco-
pacy.” Sixteenth Century Journal 29(4): 955–973.

Cipolla, Carlo M. 1972. “The Diffusion of Innovations in Early Modern Europe.”

Comparative Studies in Society and History 14(1): 46–52.

———. 1993. Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and Economy, I000–
I700, 3rd ed. London: Routledge.

Clarence-Smith, William Gervase. 2005. “The Cotton Textile Industries of Southeast
Asia and ‘Bantu’ Africa, 1840s to 1950s.” London: London School of Economics,
Global Economic History Network.

Clark, Gregory. 1987a. “Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed? Lessons from the
Cotton Mills.” Journal of Economic History 47: 141–173.

———. 1987b. “Productivity Growth Without Technical Change in European Agri-
culture Before 1850.” Journal of Economic History 47: 419–432.

———. 1988. “The Cost of Capital and Medieval Agricultural Technique.” Explo-
rations in Economic History 25: 265–294.

———. 1992. “The Economics of Exhaustion, the Postan Thesis, and the Agri-
cultural Revolution.” Journal of Economic History 52(1): 61–84.

———. 1994. “Factory Discipline.” Journal of Economic History 54: 128–163.

———. 1996. “The Political Foundations of Modern Economic Growth: England,

1540–1800.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 26: 563–588.

———. 1998. “Land Hunger: Land as a Commodity and as a Status Good in England,

1500–1910.” Explorations in Economic History 35(1): 59–82.

———. 2001a. “Markets and Economic Growth: The Grain Market of Medieval
England.” Working Paper, University of California, Davis.

———. 2001b. “Farm Wages and Living Standards in the Industrial Revolution:
England, 1670–1869.” Economic History Review 54(3): 477–505.

———. 2002a. “Farmland Rental Values and Agrarian History: England, 1500–1912.”

European Review of Economic History 6(3): 281–309.

———. 2002b. “The Agricultural Revolution? England, 1500–1912.” Working Paper,
University of California, Davis.

386   R  R cs 


———. 2003. “Agricultural Wages.” In The Oxford Encylopedia of Economic History,

Vol. 1, ed. Joel Mokyr. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 59–65.

———. 2005. “The Condition of the Working-Class in England, 1209–2004.” Jour-
nal of Political Economy 113(6): 1307–1340.

———. 2007a. “Farm Wages, Population and Economic Growth, England, 1209–
1869.” Economic History Review 60(1): 97–135.

———. 2007b. “The Economic Aggregates for England, 1209–1869.” Working Paper,
University of California, Davis.

Clark, Gregory, and Gillian Hamilton. 2006. “Survival of the Richest: The Mal-
thusian Method in England, 1585–1638.” Journal of Economic History 66(3):
707–736.

Clark, Gregory, and David Jacks. 2007. “Coal and the Industrial Revolution.” Euro-
pean Review of Economic History 11(1).

Clark, Gregory, and Patricia Levin. 2001. “How Different Was the Industrial Revo-
lution? The Revolution in Printing, 1350–1869.” Working Paper, University of
California, Davis.

Clark, Gregory, and Alan McGinley. 1989. “Selective Pressure and Economic History:
Economics in the Very Long Run.” Paper presented to the Berkeley-Stanford
Economic History Seminar, May 25.

Clark, Gregory, and Ysbrand van der Werf. 1998. “Work in Progress? The Industrious
Revolution.” Journal of Economic History 58(3): 830–843.

Clark, Gregory, Michael Huberman, and Peter Lindert. 1995. “A British Food Puzzle,

1770–1850.” Economic History Review 48(2): 215–237.

Clark, W. A. Graham. 1907. The Cotton Industry of British India and the Philippines.

Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Cockburn, J. S. 1977. “The Nature and Incidence of Crime in England, 1559–1625: A
Preliminary Survey.” In Crime in England, I//o–I8oo, ed. J. S. Cockburn. Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, pp. 49–71.

———. 1991. “Patterns of Violence in English Society: Homicide in Kent

1560–1985.” Past and Present 130: 70–106.

Cohen, Mark Nathan. 1977. The Food Crisis in Pre-History. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.

Condorcet, Jean-Antoine-Nicolas, Marquis de. 1795. Esquisse d’un tableau historique

des progrès de l’esprit humain (Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the
Human Mind). Paris: Agasse.

Cotton Spinning Productivity Team. 1951. Cotton Spinning. London: Anglo-American
Council on Productivity.

Cotton Yarn Association. 1929. “Statistics Concerning Cotton Spinning in India.” Jour-

nal of the Textile Institute. Transactions 20: T10–T20.

Cousin, Victor. 1854. Lectures on the True, the Beautiful, and the Good. New York:

D. Appleton.

R  R cs   387


Crawcour, Sidney. 1961. “The Development of a Credit System in Seventeenth-
Century Japan.” Journal of Economic History 21: 342–360.

Cressy, David. 1980. Literacy and the Social Order: Reading and Writing in Tudor and
Stuart England. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Cronk, Lee. 1991. “Wealth, Status, and Reproductive Success among the Mukogodo
of Kenya.” American Anthropologist 93: 345–360.

Curtin, Philip D. 1989. Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Tropical World
in the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Darwin, Charles. 1859. On the Origin of Species. London: John Murray.

———. 1965. The Voyage of the Beagle. London: J. M. Dent and Sons.

———. 1969. Autobiography. In The Autobiography of Charles Darwin, 1809–188L:
With Original Omissions Restored, ed. Nora Barlow. New York: W. W. Norton,

pp. 17–146.

———. 1998. The Descent of Man. Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus.

Davis, Lance E., and Robert A. Huttenback. 1986. Mammon and the Pursuit of Em-
pire: the Economics of British Imperialism. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Deane, Phyllis, and W. A. Cole. 1967. British Economic Growth, 1688–19/9, 2nd ed.

Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Deaux, George. 1969. The Black Death. London: Hamilton.

Deshpande, S. R. 1946. Report on an Enquiry into Conditions of Labour in the Cotton
Mill Industry in India. Simla: Government of India Press.

De Vries, Jan. 1984. European Urbanization, 1/00–1800. London: Methuen.

———. 1985. “The Population and Economy of the Pre-Industrial Netherlands.”

Journal of Interdisciplinary History 15(4): 661–682.

———. 1994. “The Industrial Revolution and the Industrious Revolution.” Journal
of Economic History 54: 249–270.

De Vries, Jan, and Ad van der Woude. 1997. The First Modern Economy: Success, Fail-
ure, and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1/00–181/. Cambridge, U.K.: Cam-
bridge University Press.

De Wever, F. 1978. “Rents and Selling Prices of Land at Zele, Sixteenth to Eighteenth
Century.” In The Agricultural Development of the Low Countries as Revealed by
the  Tithe and Rent Statistics, 1L/0–1800, eds. Herman van der Wee and E. van
Cauwenbere. Leuven: Leuven University Press, pp. 1–23.

Diamond, Jared M. 1987. “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race.”

Discover, May, pp. 64–66.

———. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W. W.
Norton.

Dickmann, Nicola. 2003. “Fertility and Family Income on the Move: An International
Comparison over 20 Years.” Working Paper 360, Maxwell School of Citizenship
and  Public Affairs, Syracuse University.

388   R  R cs 


Divekar, V. D. 1989. Prices and Wages in Pune Region in a Period of Transition, 180/–
18ç0 AD. Pune: Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics.

Doraiswamy, Indra. 1983. “Scope for Increasing Productivity in Spinning Mills.” In
Resume of Papers, Twenty-Fourth Technological Conference. Ahmedabad Textile Re-
search Association, Bombay Textile Research Association, Northern India Textile
Reseach Association, South India Textile Research Association. Coimbatore:
SITRA.

Dore, Ronald P. 1965. Education in Tokugawa Japan. Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press.

Dove, Michael R. 1984. “The Chayanov Slope in a Swidden Society.” In Chayanov,

Peasants and Economic Anthropology, ed. E. Paul Durrenberger. Orlando, Fla.:
Academic Press, pp. 97–132.

Duncan-Jones, Richard. 1990. Structure and Scale in the Roman Economy. Cambridge,

U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Durand, John. 1977. “Historical Estimates of World Population: An Evaluation.”

Population and Development Review 3(3): 253–296.

Dutta, Pratap C. 1984. “Biological Anthropology of Bronze Age Harappans: New
Perspectives.” In The People of South Asia: The Biological Anthropology of India,
Pakistan, and Nepal, ed. John R. Lukacs. New York: Plenum Press, pp. 59–76.

Dyer, Christopher. 1988. “Changes in Diet in the Late Middle Ages: The Case of
Harvest Workers.” Agricultural History Review 36(1): 21–37.

Easterlin, Richard A. 1974. “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some
Empirical Evidenc.” In Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in
Honour of Moses Abramowitz, ed. Paul A. David and Melvin W. Reder. New
York: Academic Press.

———. 2003. “Explaining Happiness.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 100(19): 11176–11183.

Easterly, William. 2001. The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and
Misadventures in the Tropics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 2006. The White Man’s Burden: Why the West’s Efforts to Aid the Rest Have
Done So Much Ill and So Little Good. New York: Penguin.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. 2001. “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized
Facts and Growth Models.” World Bank Economic Review 15(2): 177–220.

Edelstein, Michael. 1982. Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism. The
United Kingdom, 18/0–191ę. New York: Columbia University Press.

Eden, Frederick M. 1797. The State of the Poor. London: J. Davis.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1984. “Mortgage Interest Rates in the Populist Era.” American
Economic Review 74(5): 995–1015

Eltis, David. 1982. “Nutritional Trends in Africa and the Americas: Heights of Africans,

1819–1839.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 12: 453–475.

Emmison, F. G. 2000. Essex Wills, Vol. 12. Chelmsford: Essex Record Office.

R  R cs   389


Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth Sokoloff. 2002. “Factor Endowments, Inequal-
ity, and Paths of Development among New World Economics.” Working Paper
9259. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Epstein, S. R. 1998. “Craft Guilds, Apprenticeship, and Technological Change in
Preindustrial Europe.” Journal of Economic History 58(3): 684–713.

Evans, Nesta. 1987. The Wills of the Archdeaconry of Sudbury, I6ço–ç/. Suffolk Records
Society, Vol. 29. Woodbridge, Suffolk: Boydell Press.

———. 1993. The Wills of the Archdeaconry of Sudbury, I6ç6–ç8. Suffolk Records

Society, Vol. 35. Woodbridge, Suffolk: Boydell Press.

Everett, Daniel. 2005. “Interview.” Your Manchester, May, pp. 10–11.

Farber, Howard. 1978. “A Price and Wage Study for Northern Babylonia during the
Old Babylonian Period.” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient
21: 1–51.

Farris, William Wayne. 2006. Japan’s Medieval Population: Famine, Fertility, and War-
fare in a Transformative Age. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Federico, Giovanni, and Paolo Malanima. 2004. “Progress, Decline, Growth: Product
and Productivity in Italian Agriculture, 1000–2000.” Economic History Review
57(3): 437–464.

Feinstein, Charles. 1972. National Income, Expenditures and Output of the U.K., I8//–
I96/. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1998. “Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard of Living in
Britain during and after the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Economic History
58(3): 625–658.

Feng, Wang, James Lee, and Cameron Campbell. 1995. “Marital Fertility Control
among the Qing Nobility: Implications for Two Types of Preventive Check.”
Population Studies 49: 383–400.

Feuerwerker, Albert. 1984. “The State and Economy in Late Imperial China.” Theory
and Society 13(3): 297–326.

Fielding, Henry. 1731. The Tragedy of Tragedies, or, The Life and Death of Tom Thumb
the Great. London; J. Roberts.

Filmer, Sir Robert. 1653. An Advertisement to the Jurymen of England. Together
with A Difference between an English and Hebrew Witch. London: Richard
Royston.

Finlay, Robert. 1992. “Portuguese and Chinese Maritime Imperialism: Camoes’s
Lusiads and Luo Maodeng’s Voyage of the San Bao Eunuch.” Comparative Studies
in Society and History 34(2): 225–241.

Fitton, R. S. 1989. The Arkwrights: Spinners of Fortune. Manchester: Manchester Uni-
versity Press.

Flinn, Michael W. 1981. The European Demographic System: I/oo–I8Lo. Baltimore: Johns

Hopkins University Press.

390   R  R cs 


Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley Engerman. 1974. Time on the Cross: The Economics of
American Negro Slavery. Boston: Little, Brown.

Frank, Robert H. 1999. Luxury Fever: Why Money Fails to Satisfy in an Era of Excess.

New York: Free Press.

Frey, Bruno S., and Alois Stutzer. 2002. “What Can Economists Learn from Happi-
ness Research?” Journal of Economic Literature 40(2): 402–435.

Galley, Chris. 1995. “A Model of Early Modern Urban Demography.” Economic His-
tory Review 48(3): 448–469.

Gallup, John Luke, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 2000. “Agriculture, Climate, and Technology:
Why Are the Tropics Falling Behind?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics
82(3): 731–737.

Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic
Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 1133–1191.

Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil. 2000. “Population, Technology and Growth: From
Malthusian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American
Economic Review 90: 806–828.

Gardner, Jonathan, and Andrew J. Oswald. 2007. “Money and Mental Wellbeing: A
Longitudinal Study of Medium-Sized Lottery Wins.” Journal of Health Economics
26(1): 49–60.

Garrett, Eilidh, Alice Read, Kevin Schurer, and Simon Szreter. 2001. Changing Family
Size in England and Wales: Place, Class and Demography, I89I–I9II. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Gat, Azar. 2002. “Why City-States Existed? Riddles and Clues of Urbanization and
Fortifications.” In A Comparative Study of Six City-State Cultures, ed. Morgens H.
Hansen. Copenhagen: Danish Royal Academy, pp. 125–138.

Geary, Frank, and Tom Stark. 2004. “Trends in Real Wages during the Industrial
Revolution: A View from Across the Irish Sea.” Economic History Review 57:
362–395.

Ghersa, C. M., M. L. Roush, S. R. Radosevich, and S. M. Cordray. 1994. “Coevolu-
tion of Agrosystems and Weed Management.” BioScience 44(2): 85–94.

Given, James B. 1977. Society and Homicide in Thirteenth Century England. Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University Press.

Godwin, William. 1793. Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, and Its Influence on
Modern Morals and Happiness. London: J. Robinson.

Goldstone, Jack A. 1987. “Cultural Orthodoxy, Risk, and Innovation: The Diver-
gence of East and West in the Early Modern World.” Sociological Theory 5(2):
119–135.

Gordon, Peter. 2004. “Numerical Cognition without Words: Evidence from Ama-
zonia.” Science 306: 496–499.

R  R cs   39


Government of India, Ministry of Labour. 1954. Report on Intensive Survey of Agri-
cultural Labour, Volume 1: All India. New Delhi.

Government of India, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 2004.

Housing Stock and Constructions (July-December LooL). New Delhi.

Gransden, Antonia. 1964. The Chronicle of Bury St. Edmunds, ILIL–IçoI. London:
Nelson.

Greif, Avner. 2006. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Me-

dieval Trade. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Griliches, Zvi. 1996. “The Discovery of the Residual: A Historical Note.” Journal of
Economic Literature 34(3): 1324–1330.

Gross, Daniel R. 1984. “Time Allocation: A Tool for the Study of Cultural Behavior.”

Annual Review of Anthropology 13: 519–558.

Guilaine, Jean, and Jean Zammit. 2005. The Origins of War: Violence in Pre-History.

Oxford: Blackwell.

Guppy, H. B. 1886. “On the Physical Characters of the Solomon Islanders.” Journal
of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 15: 266–285.

Hadeishi, Hajime. 2003. “Economic Well-Being and Fertility in France: Nuits, 1744–
1792.” Journal of Economic History 63(2): 489–505.

Haines, Michael R. 1995. “Socio-economic Differentials in Infant and Child Mortal-
ity during Mortality Decline: England and Wales, 1890–1911.” Population Studies
49(2): 297–315.

Hair, P. E. H. 1971. “Deaths from Violence in Britain: A Tentative Secular Survey.”

Population Studies 25(1): 5–24.

Hajnal, John. 1965. “European Marriage Patterns in Perspective.” In Population in
History: Essays in Historical Demography, eds. D. V. Glass and D. E. C. Eversley.
London: Edward Arnold, pp. 101–143.

Hamilton, Gillian, and Gregory Clark. 2006. “Economic Status and Reproductive
Success in New France.” Working Paper, University of Toronto.

Hanawalt, Barbara A. 1976. “Violent Death in England in the Fourteenth- and Early
Fifteenth Centuries.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 18: 297–320.

———. 1979. Crime and Conflict in Medieval England, Içoo–ę8. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

Hanley, Susan B. 1997. Everyday Things in Premodern Japan: The Hidden Legacy of

Material Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Harley, C. Knick. 1998. “Cotton Textile Prices and the Industrial Revolution.” Eco-
nomic History Review 51(1): 49–83.

Harris, Rivkah. 1968. “Some Aspects of the Centralization of the Realm Under Ham-
murapi and His Successors.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 88(4): 727–732.
Harvey, Barbara. 1993. Living and Dying in England IIoo–I/ęo: The Monastic Experi-

ence. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

392   R  R cs 


Hauser, William B. 1974. Economic Change in Tokugawa Japan: Osaka and the Kinai
Cotton Trade. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Hawkes, Ernest William. 1916. “Skeletal Measurements and Observations of the Point
Barrow Eskimo with Comparisons with Other Eskimo Groups.” American An-
thropologist, New Series 18(2): 203–244.

Headrick, Daniel. 1988. The Tentacles of Progress: Technology Transfer in the Age of Im-
perialism, I8/o–I9ęo. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Helps, Arthur. 1874. Life and Labours of Mr. Brassey, I8o/–I8yo. Boston: Roberts
Brothers.

Henderson, W. O. 1965. Britain and Industrial Europe, Iy/o–I8yo: Studies in British

Influence on the Industrial Revolution in Western Europe. Leicester: Leicester Uni-
versity Press.

Herlihy, David. 1967. Medieval and Renaissance Pistoia; The Social History of an Ital-

ian Town, ILoo–Ięço. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Heston, Alan. 1983. “National Income.” In The Cambridge Economic History of India,
Vol. 2: c. 1757–c. 1970, eds. Dharma Kumar and Meghnad Desai. New York:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 376–462.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten. 2006. Penn World Table Version

6.2. Philadelphia: Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income
and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.

Hill, Kim, and A. M. Hurtado. 1996. Ache Life History: The Ecology and Demography

of a Foraging People. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.

Ho, Jun Seong, and James B. Lewis. 2006. “Wages, Rents and Interest Rates in South-
ern Korea, 1700–1900.” Research in Economic History 24: 217–283.

Ho, Ping-Ti. 1959. “Aspects of Social Mobility in China, 1368–1911.” Comparative
Studies in Society and History 1(4): 330–359.

Hobbes, Thomas. 1651. Leviathan. London.

Hollingsworth, Thomas H. 1965. The Demography of the British Peerage. London:
Population Investigation Committee, LSE.

Homer, Sidney, and Richard Sylla. 1996. A History of Interest Rates, 3rd ed. New

Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.

Hopkins, Keith. 1966. “On the Probable Age Structure of the Roman Population.”

Population Studies 20(2): 245–264.

Houghton, Philip. 1996. People of the Great Ocean: Aspects of the Human Biology of the
Early Pacific. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Houston, R. A. 1982. “The Development of Literacy: Northern England, 1640–1750.”

Economic History Review 35: 199–216.

Hudson, Michael. 2000. “How Interest Rates Were Set, 2500 BC–1000 AD: Máˇs,
Tokos, and Foenus as Metaphors for Interest Accruals.” Journal of the Economic
and Social History of the Orient 43(2): 132–161.

R  R cs   393


Hunter, Richard A., and Ida Macalpine. 1963. Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry,

I/ç/–I86o. London: Oxford University Press.

Hurtado, A. Magdalena, and Kim R. Hill. 1987. “Early Dry Season Subsistence Ecol-
ogy of Cuiva (Hiwi) Foragers of Venezuela.” Human Ecology 15(2): 163–187.

———. 1990. “Seasonality in Foraging Society: Variation in Diet, Work Effort,
Fertility, and Sexual Division of Labor among the Hiwi of Venezuela.” Journal
of Anthropological Research 46(3): 293–346.

Hutchins, John, Richard Gough, and J. B. Nichols. 1796. The History and Antiq-
uities of the County of Dorset, Vol. 1. London: J. Nichols.

Ingram, Martin. 1985. “The Reform of Popular Culture? Sex and Marriage in Early
Modern England.” In Popular Culture in the Seventeenth Century, ed. Barry Reay.
Kent, U.K.: Beckenham, pp. 129–165.

International Labour Organization, Bureau of Statistics. 2006a. Occupational Wages
and Hours of Work and Retail Food Prices: Statistics from the ILO October Inquiry.
Geneva: International Labour Organization.

———. 2006b. Yearbook of Labour Statistics. Geneva: International Labour Orga-
nization.

Jackson, Stanley. 1968. The Sassoons. London: Heinemann.

Jacob, William. 1826. Report on the Trade in Foreign Corn and on the Agriculture of the
North of Europe. London: James Ridgeway.

Jannetta, Ann Bowman. 1992. “Famine Mortality in Nineteenth Century Japan: The
Evidence from a Temple Death Register.” Population Studies 46(3): 427–443.

Jannetta, Ann Bowman, and Samuel Preston. 1991. “Two Centuries of Mortality
Change in Central Japan: The Evidence from a Temple Death Register.” Popu-
lation Studies 45(3): 417–436.

Jeans, James. 1884. “On the Comparative Efficiency and Earnings of Labour at Home
and Abroad.” Journal of the Statistical Society of London 47(4): 614–665.

Jenike, Mark R. 2001. “Nutritional Ecology: Diet, Physical Activity, and Body Size.”
In Hunter-Gatherers: an Interdisciplinary Perspective, eds. Catherine Panter-Brick,
Robert H. Layton, and Peter Rowley-Conwy. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, pp. 205–238.

Jevons, F. B. 1895. “Work and Wages in Athens.” Journal of Hellenistic Studies 15:
239–247.

———. 1896. “Some Ancient Greek Pay Bills.” Economic Journal 6(23): 470–475.

Johnson, A. 1975. “Time Allocation in a Michiguenga Community.” Ethnology 14(3):
310–321.

Johnson, Allen C. 1936. Roman Egypt to the Reign of Diocletian: An Economic Survey

of Ancient Rome, Vol. II, ed. Tenney Frank. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.

Jones, Charles I. 2002. Introduction to Economic Growth, 2nd ed. New York: W. W.

Norton.

394   R  R cs 


Jones, Rhys. 1977. “The Tasmanian Paradox.” In Stone Tools as Cultural Markers, ed.

R. V. S. Wright. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, pp. 189–204.

———. 1978. “Why Did the Tasmanians Stop Eating Fish?” In Explorations in Ethno-
archaeology, ed. R. A. Gould. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,

pp. 11–48.

Jun, By Seong Ho, and James B. Lewis. 2006. “Labor Costs, Land Prices, Land Rent,
and Interest Rates in the Southern Region of Korea.” Research in Economic History
24: 217–283.

Kahneman, Daniel, Alan B. Krueger, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur
Stone. 2004. “Toward National Well-Being Accounts.” American Economic Review
94(2): 429–434.

Kalas, Robert J. 1996. “Marriage, Clientage, Office Holding, and the Advancement of
the Early Modern French Nobility: The Noailles Family of Limousin.” Sixteenth
Century Journal 27(2): 365–383.

Kamps, Christophe. 2004. “New Estimates of Government Net Capital Stocks for 22
OECD countries 1960–2001.” IMF Working Paper 04/67. Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund.

Kaplan, David. 2000. “The Darker Side of the ‘Original Affluent Society.’ ” Journal

of Anthropological Research 56(3): 301–324.

Kaplan, Hillard, and Kim Hill. 1992. “The Evolutionary Ecology of Food Acquisi-
tion.” In Evolutionary Ecology and Human Behavior, eds. E. Smith and B. Winter-
halder. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, pp. 167–202.

Kelly, Robert L. 1995. The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways.

Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Kirkaldy, Adam W. 1914. British Shipping: Its History, Organization and Importance.

London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.

Knauft, Bruce M. 1987. “Reconsidering Violence in Simple Human Societies: Homi-
cide among the Gebusi of New Guinea.” Current Anthropology 28(4): 457–500.
Koepke, Nikola, and Joerg Baten. 2005. “The Biological Standard of Living in Europe
during the Last Two Millennia.” European Review of Economic History 9(1): 61–95.

Komlos, John. 1993. “A Malthusian Episode Revisited: The Height of British and
Irish Servants in Colonial America.” Economic History Review 46: 768–782.

———. 1998. “Shrinking in a Growing Economy? The Mystery of Physical Stature
during the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Economic History 58(3): 779–802.

———. 2004. “On British Pygmies and Giants: The Physical Stature of British
Youth in the 18th and 19th Centuries.” Working Paper, University of Munich.

Krause, Kate, and William T. Harbaugh. 1999. “Economic Experiments That You
Can Perform at Home on Your Children.” Working Paper, University of New
Mexico.

Kremer, Michael. 1993a. “The O-Ring Theory of Development.” Quarterly Journal of

Economics 108(3): 551–575.

R  R cs   395


———. 1993b. “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to

1990.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3): 681–716.

Landers, John. 1993. Death and the Metropolis: Studies in the Demographic History of
London, I6yo–I8ço. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Landes, David. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations. Why Some Are So Rich and
Some So Poor. London: Little, Brown.

Larsen, Clark Spencer. 1995. “Biological Changes in Human Populations with Agri-
culture.” Annual Review of Anthropology 24: 185–213.

Larsen, Jakob A. O. 1938. “Roman Greece.” In An Economic Survey of Ancient
Rome, Vol. IV, ed. Tenney Frank. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,

pp. 259–498.

Lee, James Z., and Cameron Campbell. 1997. Fate and Fortune in Rural China: So-
cial Organization and Population Behavior in Liaoning, Iyyę–I8yç. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Lee, James Z., and Wang Feng. 1999. One Quarter of Humanity: Malthusian Mythology
and Chinese Realities, Iyoo–Looo. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Lee, Ronald D., and R. S. Schofield. 1981. “British Population in the Eighteenth
Century.” In The Economic History of Britain since Iyoo, Vol. 1: Iyoo–I86o, eds.
Roderick Floud and Donald McCloskey. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, pp. 17–35.

Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. 1981. “History That Stands Still.” In The Mind and
Method of the Historian. Brighton, Sussex:: Harvester Press, pp. 1–27.

Levine, Ruth, and the What Works Working Group with Molly Kinder. 2004.
Millions Saved: Proven Success in Global Health. Washington, D.C.: Center for
Global Development.

Lindert, Peter H. 1986. “Unequal English Wealth since 1670.” Journal of Political
Economy 94(6): 1127–1162.

———. 2004. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth since the Eigh-
teenth Century, Vol. 1. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Lindert, Peter H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1983. “English Workers’ Living Stan-
dards during the Industrial Revolution: A New Look.” Economic History Review
36(1): 1–25.

———. 1985. “English Workers’ Real Wages: Reply to Crafts.” Journal of Economic
History 45: 145–153.

Lizot, J. 1977. “Population, Resources and Warfare among the Yanomame.” Man,
New Series 12(3/4): 497–517.

Long, Pamela. 1991. “Invention, Authorship, ‘Intellectual Property,’ and the Origin
of Patents: Notes Towards a Conceptual History.” Technology and Culture 32:
846–884.

Lucas, Robert. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 22: 3–42.

396   R  R cs 


Lucas, Robert E. 2002. “The Industrial Revolution: Past and Future.” In Lectures on
Economic Growth. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, pp. 109–188.

Macfarlane, Alan. 1978. The Origins of English Individualism: The Family, Property,
and Social Transition. Oxford: Blackwell.

———. 1987. Marriage and Love in England: Modes of Reproduction Içoo–I8ęo. Ox-
ford: Blackwell.

———. 2003. The Savage Wars of Peace: England, Japan and the Malthusian Trap.

Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.

MacGregor, John. 1850. Commercial Statistics, A Digest, Vol. 4. London: Whittaker.
Maddison, Angus. 2001. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris:

OECD.

Malthus, Thomas Robert. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population, ed. Anthony
Flew. Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire: Penguin Books, 1970.

———. 1830. A Summary View of the Principle of Population. Aylesbury, Bucking-

hamshire: Penguin Books, 1970.

Marx, Karl. 1904. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, trans. N. I.
Stone. Chicago: C. H. Kerr.

———. 1990. Capital, Vol. 1, trans. Ben Fowkes. New York: Penguin Classics.

Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. 1967. The Communist Manifesto, trans. Samuel
Moore. Baltimore: Penguin.

Masali, M. 1972. “Bone Size and Proportions as Revealed by Bone Measurements and
Their Meaning in Environmental Adaptation.” Journal of Human Evolution 1:
187–197.

Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman, and Yishay Yafeh. 2006. Emerging Markets and Fi-
nancial Globalization: Sovereign Bond Spreads in I8yo–I9Iç and Today. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Mazumdar, Dipak. 1984. “The Issue of Small versus Large in the Indian Textile In-
dustry: An Analytical and Historical Survey.” World Bank Staff Working Paper
645. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

McCloskey, Donald. 1981. “The Industrial Revolution 1780–1860: A Survey.” In
The Economic History of Britain since Iyoo, eds. Roderick Flood and Donald
McCloskey. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, pp. 103–127.

McCulloch, J. R. 1881. The Works of David Ricardo. London: John Murray.
McDaniel, Antonio. 1992. “Extreme Mortality in Nineteenth-Century Africa: The

Case of Liberian Immigrants.” Demography 29(4): 581–594.

McEvedy, Colin, and Richard Jones. 1978. Atlas of World Population History. London:

A. Lane.

McGhee, Robert. 1994. “Disease and the Development of Inuit Culture.” Current
Anthropology 35(5): 565–594.

McIntosh, Marjorie. 1980. “Land, Tenure and Population on the Royal Manor of
Havering, 1251–1352/3.” Economic History Review 33(1): 17–31.

R  R cs   397


McNeill, William H. 1976. Plagues and Peoples. New York: Anchor Books.

Mduma, Simon A. R., A. R. E. Sinclair, and Ray Hilborn. 1999. “Food Regulates
the Serengeti Wildebeest: A 40-Year Record.” Journal of Animal Ecology 68(6):
1101–1122.

Meiklejohn, Christopher, and Marek Zvelebil. 1991. “Health Status of European Pop-
ulations at the Agricultural Transition and the Implications for the Adoption of
Farming.” In Health in Past Societies: Biocultural Interpretations of Human Skeletal
Remains in Archaeological Contexts, eds. Helen Bush and Marek Zvelebil. British
Archaeological Reports International Series 567. Oxford: Tempus Reparatum.

Mellink, Machteld J., and J. Lawrence Angel. 1970. “Excavations at Karatas-Semay

U.K. and Elmali, Lycia, 1969.” American Journal of Archaeology 74(3): 245–
259.

Minge-Klevana, Wanda. 1980. “Does Labor Time Increase with Industrialization? A
Survey of Time-Allocation Studies.” Current Anthropology 21(3): 279–298.

Mischel, Walter, Yuichi Shoda, and Monica L. Rodriguez. 1989. “Delay of Gratifica-
tion in Children.” Science 244: 933–938.

Misra, Sanjiv. 1993. India’s Textile Sector: A Policy Analysis. New Delhi: Sage.
Mitchell, Brian R. 1995. International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia and Oceania,

Iy/o–I988. New York: Stockton Press.

———. 1998a. International Historical Statistics: Europe, Iy/o–I99ç. New York: Grove’s
Dictionaries.

———. 1998b. International Historical Statistics: The Americas, Iy/o–I99ç. New York:

Stockton Press.

Mitchell, B. R., and Phyllis Deane. 1971. Abstract of British Historical Statistics. Cam-
bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Mody, R.K.P. 1951. “Maximising Mill Output and Efficiency: Practical Hints to Job-
bers and Mukadams.” Indian Textile Journal 61(731): 718–721.

Mokyr, Joel. 1988. “Is There Still Life in the Pessimist Case? Consumption during the
Industrial Revolution, 1790–1850.” Journal of Economic History 48(1): 69–92.

———. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress.

New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 2002. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Foundations of the Knowledge Economy.

Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

———. 2005. “The Intellectual Origins of Modern Economic Growth.” Journal of
Economic History 65(2): 285–351.

———. 2006. “Mobility, Creativity, and Technological Development: David Hume,
Immanuel Kant and the Economic Development of Europe.” In Kolloquiumsband
of the XX. Deutschen Kongresses für Philosophie, ed. G. Abel. Berlin, pp. 1131–161.

Moore, Ray A. 1969. “Samurai Discontent and Social Mobility in the Late Tokugawa
Period.” Monumenta Nipponica 24(1–2): 79–91.

398   R  R cs 


———. 1970. “Adoption and Samurai Mobility in Tokugawa Japan.” Journal of
Asian Studies 29: 617–632.

Morgan, Stephen L. 2006. “Height, Health and Welfare in South China over the Past
Two Centuries.” Working Paper, Melbourne University.

Morris, Morris D. 1965. The Emergence of an Industrial Labor Force in India. Berke-

ley: University of California Press.

Morris, Morris D., and Clyde B. Dudley. 1975. “Selected Railway Statistics for the
Indian Subcontinent (India, Pakistan and Bangladesh), 1853–1946/7.” Artha
Vijnana 17(3): 202–204.

Murray, Alexander. 1978. Reason and Society in the Middle Ages. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

Nakamura, James I. 1981. “Human Capital Accumulation in Pre-Modern Japan.”

Journal of Economic History 41(2): 263–281.

Newman, Richard. 1981. Workers and Unions in Bombay I9I8–I9L9: A Study of
Organisation in the Cotton Mills. Canberra: Australian National University
Monographs.

Nicholas, Stephen, and Richard H. Steckel. 1991. “Heights and Living Standards of
English Workers during the Early Years of Industrialization, 1770–1815.” Journal
of Economic History 51(4): 937–957.

Nordhoff, Charles. 1934. Pitcairn’s Island. Boston: Little, Brown.

North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: W. W.
Norton.

———. 1994. “Economic Performance through Time.” American Economic Review

84(3): 359–368.

North, Douglass C., and R. P. Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World. Cam-
bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C., and Barry Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment:
Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century
England.” Journal of Economic History 49: 803–832.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan Taylor. 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Cri-
sis, and Growth. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai. 1997. Compendium of Textile Statistics,

I99y. Mumbai, India.

———. 1998. Basic Textile Statistics for I99y–8. Mumbai, India.

Ogden, Cynthia L., Cheryl D. Fryar, Margaret D. Carroll, and Katherine M. Flegal.
2004. Mean Body Weight, Height, and Body Mass Index, United States I96o–LooL.
Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics 347. Hyattsville, Md.: National
Center for Health Statistics.

Ó Gráda, Cormac. 1999. Black ’ęy and Beyond: The Great Irish Famine in History,
Economy, and Memory. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

R  R cs   399


Oliver, Douglas L. 1974. Ancient Tahitian Society, Vol. 1: Ethnography. Honolulu: Uni-
versity Press of Hawaii.

Olson, Mancur. 1993. “Dictatorship, Democracy and Development.” American Po-

litical Science Review 87(3): 567–576.

O’Rourke, Kevin, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2001. Globalization and History: The Evo-
lution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge: Mass.: MIT Press.

———. 2002a. “When Did Globalization Begin?” European Review of Economic His-
tory 6: 23–50.

———. 2002b. “After Columbus: Explaining the Global Trade Boom, 1500–1800.”

Journal of Economic History 62(2): 417–456.

Oswald, Andrew J., and Nattavudh Powdthavee. 2007. “Obesity, Unhappiness and
The Challenge of Affluence: Theory and Evidence.” Working Paper, University of
Warwick.

Oulton, Nicholas. 2001. “Measuring Capital Services in the United Kingdom.” Bank
of England Quarterly Bulletin, Autumn, pp. 295–307.

Overton, Mark. 1996. Agricultural Revolution in England: The Transformation of the
Agrarian Economy I/oo–I8/o. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Pack, Howard. 1987. Productivity, Technology and Industrial Development: A Case Study
in Textiles. New York: Oxford University Press.

Palumbi, Stephen R. 2001. “Humans as the World’s Greatest Evolutionary Source.”

Science 293: 1786–1790.

Pamuk, Sevket. 1987. The Ottoman Empire and European Capitalism, I8Lo–I9Iç: Trade,
Investment, and Production. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2005. “Urban Real Wages around the Eastern Mediterranean in Compara-
tive Perspective, 1100–2000.” Research in Economic History 23: 213–232.

———. 2006. “Evolution of Financial Institutions in the Ottoman Empire,

1600–1840.” Working Paper, Bogazici University.

Parliamentary Papers. 1834. Royal Commission on the Employment of Children in Fac-
tories, Supplementary Report. Vol. XIX.

———. 1870. Annual Statement of Trade. Vol. LXIII.

———. 1909a. Royal Commission on Shipping Rings. Vols. XLVII, XLVIII.

———. 1909b. Report of the Indian Factory Labour Commission, Vol. 2: Evidence.

Vol. LXIII.

Parthasarathi, Prasannan. 1998. “Rethinking Wages and Competitiveness in the Eigh-
teenth Century: Britain and South India.” Past and Present 158: 79–109.

Passin, Herbert. 1965. Society and Education in Japan. New York: Teachers College
Press.

Pearse, Arno S. 1929. The Cotton Industry of Japan and China. Manchester.

———. 1930. The Cotton Industry of India: Being the Report of the Journey to India.

Manchester: Taylor, Garnett, Evans.

400  R  R cs 


Pelletier, David L., Jan W. Low, and Louis A. H. Msukwa. 1991. “Malawi Maternal
and Child Nutrition Survey: Study Design and Anthropometric Characteristics
of Children and Adults.” American Journal of Human Biology 3(4): 347–361.

Penn World Tables. http://www.bized.ac.U.K./dataserv/penndata/penn.htm.
Pennington, Renee. 2001. “Hunter Gatherer Demography.” In Hunter-Gatherers: An

Interdisciplinary Perspective, eds. Catherine Panter-Brick, Robert H. Layton, and
Peter Rowley-Conwy. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, pp. 171–204.
Pepys, Samuel. 2000. The Diary of Samuel Pepys, ed. Robert Latham and William

Matthews. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Perkins, Dwight. 1969. Agricultural Development in China, Iç68–I968. Chicago:
Aldine.

Pitt, David C. 1970. Tradition and Economic Progress in Samoa: A Case Study of the

Role of Traditional Social Institutions in Economic Development. Oxford: Claren-
don Press.

Pomeranz, Kenneth. 2000. The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of

the Modern World Economy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Powell, Marvin A. 1990 “Identification and Interpretation of Long Term Price
Fluctuations in Babylonia: More on the History of Money in Mesopotamia.” Alt-
orientalische Forschungen 17(1): 76–99.

Power, Chris, Orly Manor, and Leah Li. 2002. “Are Inequalities in Height Under-
estimated by Adult Social Positions? Effects of Changing Social Structure and
Height Selection in a Cohort Study.” British Medical Journal 325: 131–134.

Prados de la Escosura, Leandro. 2000. “International Comparisons of Real Product,
1820–1990: An Alternative Data Set.” Explorations in Economic History 37(1):
1–41.

Prescott, Edward C. 2004. “Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Euro-
peans?” Federal Reserve Bank, Minneapolis–Quarterly Review 28(1): 2–14.

Prestwich, Michael. 1996. Arms and Warfare in the Middle Ages: The English Experi-
ence. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1994. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Up-
date.” World Development 22(9): 1325–1343.

Rajamanickam, R., and R. Ranganathan. 1997. Labour and Machine Productivity in
Spinning, Part 1. Coimbature: SITRA.

Ramsay, James H. 1903. “Chroniclers’ Estimates of Numbers and Official Records.”

English Historical Review 18(72): 625–629.

Rastall, Walter H. 1922. Asiatic Markets for Industrial Machinery. Special Agent Series

215. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and
Domestic Commerce.

Rathbone, Dominic. 1991. Economic Rationalism and Rural Society in Third-Century

A.D. Egypt. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

R  R cs   40


Ratnam, T. V., and R. Rajamanickam. 1980. “Productivity in Spinning: Growth and
Prospects.” In Resume of Papers: Twenty-First Technological Conference. Ahmedabad
Textile Research Association, Bombay Textile Research Association, Northern In-
dia Textile Reseach Association, South India Textile Research Association. Bom-
bay: BTRA.

Rawski, Evelyn Sakahida. 1979. Education and Popular Literacy in Ch’ing China. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Rayner, J. L., and G. T. Crook. 1926. The Complete Newgate Calendar, Vol. 5. Lon-

don: Navarre Society.

Razi, Zvi. 1980. Life, Marriage and Death in a Medieval Parish: Economy, Society and
Demography in Halesowen, ILyo–Ięoo. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press.

———. 1981. “Family, Land and the Village Community in Later Medieval England.”

Past and Present 93: 3–36.

Razzell, Peter. 1994. Essays in English Population History. London: Caliban.

Rhode, Paul W. 1995. “Learning, Capital Accumulation, and the Transformation of
California Agriculture.” Journal of Economic History 55(4): 773–800.

Ricardo, David. 1821. The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 3rd ed. Lon-
don: John Murray.

Richerson, Peter J., Robert Boyd, and Robert L. Bettinger. 2001. “Was Agriculture
Impossible during the Pleistocene but Mandatory during the Holocene? A Cli-
mate Change Hypothesis.” American Antiquity 66(3): 387–411.

Robertson, George. 1955. An Account of the Discovery of Tahiti. From the Journal of
George Robertson, ed. Oliver Warner. London: Folio Society.

Robinson, Eric H. 1974. “The Early Diffusion of Steam Power.” Journal of Economic
History 34(1): 91–107.

Rodrigues, Joao. 1973. The Island of Japon, trans. and ed. Michael Cooper. Tokyo: Ko-
dansha International.

Rogers, Alan R. 1994. “Evolution of Time Preference by Natural Selection.” American

Economic Review 84(3): 460–481.

Roy, Subrata K. 1995. “Comparative Study of Physiological and Anthropometric
Characteristics of High and Low Productivity Workers in Northern West Ben-
gal,  India.” American Journal of Human Biology 7(6): 693–699.

Rubinstein, W. D. 1981. Men of Property: The Very Wealthy in Britain since the Indus-
trial Revolution. London: Croom Helm.

Rudraswamy, V. 1957. A Study of Absenteeism in Textile Mills. Research Reports 2(5).

Coimbatore: Southern India Textile Research Association.

———. 1967. “Absenteeism in South Indian Textile Industry.” In Proceedings of the
Conference on Human Factors in Industry. Bombay: Bombay Textile Research
Association, pp. 109–125.

402   R  R cs 


Rundall, Thomas. 1850. Memorials of the Empire of Japon in the XVI and XVII Cen-
turies. London: Hakluyt Society.

Russell, Josiah C. 1948. English Medieval Population. Albuquerque, N.M.: University
of New Mexico Press.

Russell, M. J. 1959. “Hired Champions.” American Journal of Legal History 3(3):

242–259.

Rutnagur, S. M. 1927. Bombay Industries: The Cotton Mills. Bombay: Indian Textile
Journal.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. 2001. “Tropical Underdevelopment.” Working Paper 8119. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Sahlins, Marshall. 1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.

Scaglion, Richard. 1986. “The Importance of Nighttime Observations in Time Allo-
cation Studies.” American Ethnologist 13(3): 537–545.

Schama, Simon. 1987. The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Cul-
ture in the Golden Age. London: Collins.

Schneider, Friedrich, and Dominik H. Enste. 2000. “Shadow Economies: Size, Causes
and Consequences.” Journal of Economic Literature 38(1): 77–114.

Schofield, Roger. 1973. “Dimensions of Illiteracy, 1750–1850.” Explorations in Economic
History 10: 437–454.

Shannon, Fred A. 1927. “The Life of the Common Soldier in the Union Army, 1861–
1865.” Mississippi Valley Historical Review 13(4): 465–482.

Schulze-Gaevernitz, G. von. 1895. The Cotton Trade in England and on the Continent.

London: Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent.

Schumpeter, Elizabeth B. 1960. English Overseas Trade Statistics, I69y–I8o8. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Sharma, R. S. 1965. “Usury in Early Mediaeval India (A.D. 400–1200).” Comparative

Studies in Society and History 8(1): 56–77.

Shindo, Takehiro. 1961. Labor in the Japanese Cotton Industry. Tokyo: Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.

Shirras, G. Findlay. 1923. Report of an Enquiry into the Wages and Hours of Labour in

the Cotton Mill Industry. Bombay: Labour Office, Government of Bombay.

Shiue, Carol, and Wolfgang Keller. 2007. “Markets in China and Europe on the Eve
of the Industrial Revolution.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Singer, H. W. 1941. “An Index of Urban Land Rents and House Rents in England and
Wales, 1845–1913.” Econometrica 9(3/4): 221–230.

Siskind, Janet. 1973. To Hunt in the Morning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Smits, Jan-Pieter, Edwin Horlings, and Jan Luiten van Zanden. 2000. Dutch GNP
and Its Components, I8oo–I9Iç. Groningen Growth and Development Center.

Snell, Daniel C. 1997. Life in the Ancient Near East, çIoo–ççL B.C.E. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press.

R  R cs   403


Solow, Robert M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 70: 65–94.

Sreenivasan, Kasthuri. 1984. India’s Textile Industry: A Socioeconomic Analysis. Coim-
batore: SITRA.

Steckel, Richard H. 1995. “Stature and the Standard of Living.” Journal of Economic

Literature 33: 1903–1940.

———. 2001. “Health and Nutrition in the PreIndustrial Era: Insights from a Millen-
nium of Average Heights in Northern Europe.” Working Paper 8542. Cambridge,
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Steckel, Richard H., and Joseph M. Prince. 2001. “Tallest in the World: Native Amer-
icans of the Great Plains in the Nineteenth Century.” American Economic Review
91(1): 287–294.

Stein, Burton. 1960. “The Economic Function of a Medieval South Indian Temple.”

Journal of Asian Studies 19(2): 163–176.

Stiner, Mary C. 2001. “Thirty Years On: The ‘Broad Spectrum Revolution’ and Paleo-
lithic Demography.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98(13):
6993–6996.

———. 2005. The Faunas of Hayonim Cave, Israel. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

Stinson, Sara. 1992. “Nutritional Adaptation.” Annual Review of Anthropology 21:

143–170.

Stuart, William. 1902. “The Value of Chinese as Compared with White Labour.” In
Proceedings of the Society and Report of the Council, I9oI–L. Shanghai: Engineer-
ing Society of China, pp. 75–97.

Sussman, Nathan. 2005. “Income Inequality in Paris in the Heyday of the Commer-
cial Revolution.” Manuscript, Hebrew University, Department of Economics.

Tann, Jennifer, and M. J. Breckin. 1978. “The International Diffusion of the Watt
Engine.” Economic History Review 31(4): 541–564.

Temple, Robert. 1986. The Genius of China. ç,ooo Years of Science, Discovery, and
Invention. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Textile Council. 1969. Cotton and Allied Textiles. Manchester.

Thompson, F. M. L. 1976. “Nineteenth Century Horse Sense.” Economic History
Review 29(1): 60–81.

Thrupp, Sylvia. 1957. “A Survey of the Alien Population of England in 1440.” Specu-
lum 32(2): 262–273.

Tomasson, Richard F. 1977. “A Millennium of Misery: The Demography of the Ice-
landers.” Population Studies 31(3): 405–427.

Trevor, J. C. 1947. “The Physical Characteristics of the Sandawe.” Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 77(1): 61–78.

Truswell, A. Stewart, and John D. L. Hansen. 1976. “Medical Research among the

404   R  R cs 


!Kung.” In Kalahari Hunter-Gatherers, eds. Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, pp. 166–194.

Trut, Lyudmila N. 1999. “Early Canid Domestication: The Fox Farm Experiment.”

American Scientist 87(2): 160–161.

Tucker, Bram. 2001. “The Behavioral Ecology and Economics of Variation, Risk and
Diversification among Mikea Forager-Farmers of Madagascar.” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Department of Anthropology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
United Kingdom, Department of Communities and Local Government. 2007. Live

Tables on Housing Market and House Prices, http://www.communities.gov.uk/.
United Kingdom, Department of Education and Skills. 2003. The Skills for Life Sur-

vey. Research Brief RB490. London: The Stationary Office.

United Kingdom, Department of Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs. 2005. Agri-
culture in the UK Loo/. London: The Stationary Office.

United Kingdom, H.M. Revenue and Customs. 2007. Distribution of Personal
Wealth, Looç, http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/stats/personal_wealth.

United Kingdom, Office of National Statistics. 2003. UK Looo Time Use Study, http://
www.statistics.gov.uk/statbase/.

———. 2006a. Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings, http://www.statistics.gov.uk/

pdfdir/ashe1006.pdf.

———. 2006b. Trends in ONS Longitudinal Study Estimates of Life Expectancy, by
Social Class I9yL–LooI. London: The Stationary Office.

United Nations. 2006. Looç Demographic Yearbook. New York: United Nations.
United Nations, Development Program. 2005. Human Development Report, Loo/.

New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

United States, Census Bureau. 2002. Statistical Abstract of the United States. Wash-
ington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office.

United States, Department of Commerce. 1915. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic
Commerce, Special Consular Reports 72, British India. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.

United States, Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration. 2004.
LooI Residential Energy Consumption Survey, http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/
consumption.

United States, Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2006. “Hourly
Compensation Costs for Production Workers in Manufacturing, 32 Countries or
Areas, 22 Manufacturing Industries, 1992–2004.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office.

United States, Economic Report of the President. 2001. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.

United States, House of Representatives. 1912. Report of the Tariff Board. Cotton Man-

ufactures. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

R  R cs   405


United States, Naval Oceanographic Office. 1965. Distances between Ports. Publication

151. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Usher, Abbott Payson. 1929. A History of Mechanical Inventions. New York: McGraw-
Hill.

Van Zanden, Jan Luiten. 1995. “Tracing the Beginning of the Kuznets Curve: Western
Europe during the Early Modern Period.” Economic History Review 48(4): 643–664.

———. 1999. “Wages and the Standard of Living in Europe, 1500–1800.” European
Review of Economic History 2: 175–197.

———. 2004. “The Skill Premium and the Great Divergence.” Working Paper, Uni-
versity of Utrecht.

Veenhoven, Ruut. 2005. World Database of Happiness, Distributional Findings in Na-

tions. Rotterdam: Erasmus University, www.worlddatabaseofhappiness.eur.nl.
Von Moschzisker, Robert. 1922. “The Historic Origin of Trial by Jury. III.” Univer-

sity of Pennsylvania Law Review and American Law Register 70(3): 159–171.

Voth, Hans-Joachim. 2001. “The Longest Years: New Estimates of Labor Input in
England, 1760–1830.” Journal of Economic History 61(4): 1065–1082.

Waddell, Eric. 1972. The Mound Builders: Agricultural Practices, Environment, and So-
ciety in the Central Highlands of New Guinea. Seattle: University of Washington
Press.

Walker, Robert, Kim Hill, Hillard Kaplan, and Garnett McMillan. 2002. “Age-
Dependency in Hunting Ability among the Ache in Eastern Paraguay.” Journal
of Human Evolution 42: 639–657.

Walmsley, Herbert E. 1893. Cotton Spinning and Weaving. A Practical and Theoretical
Treatise. Manchester: Heywood.

Ward, Marianne, and John Devereux. 2003. “Measuring British Decline: Direct ver-
sus Long-Span Income Measures.” Journal of Economic History 63: 826–851.

Wasson, E. A. 1998. “The Penetration of New Wealth into the English Governing
Class from the Middle Ages to the First World War.” Economic History Review
51(1): 25–48.

Weir, David. 1984. “Life Under Pressure: France and England, 1670–1870.” Journal
of Economic History 44(1): 27–48.

Werner, D. W., N. M. Flowers, M. L. Ritter, and D. R. Gross. 1979. “Subsistence
Productivity and Hunting Effort in Native South America.” Human Ecology
7(4): 303–316.

White, Lynn. 1962. Medieval Technology and Social Change. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

Will, Pierre-Etienne, and R. Bin Wong. 1991. Nourish the People: The State Civilian

Granary System in China, I6/o–I8/o. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center
for Chinese Studies.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1984. “Why Was British Growth So Slow during the Industrial
Revolution?” Journal of Economic History 44(3): 687–712.

406   R  R cs 


Winterhalter, Bruce. 1993. “Work, Resources and Population in Foraging Societies.”

Man 28(2): 321–340.

Wolcott, Susan, and Gregory Clark. 1999. “Why Nations Fail: Managerial Decisions
and Performance in Indian Cotton Textiles, 1890–1938.” Journal of Economic His-
tory 59(2): 397–423.

Wood, George Henry. 1910 “The Statistics of Wages in the Nineteenth Century. Part
XIX–The Cotton Industry. Section V.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
73(6/7): 585–633.

Woodburn, James. 1980. “Hunters and Gatherers Today and Reconstruction of the
Past.” In Soviet and Western Anthropology, ed. E. Gellner. London: Duckworth,

pp. 95–117.

World Health Organization. 2002. World Report on Violence and Health. Geneva.
Wrigley, E. A. 1990. Continuity, Chance and Change: The Character of the Industrial

Revolution in England. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Wrigley, E. A., R. S. Davies, J. E. Oeppen, and R. S. Schofield. 1997. English Popu-
lation History from Family Reconstitution: I/8o–I8çy. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.

Yamamura, Kozo. 1974. A Study of Samurai Income and Entrepreneurship. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Yasuba, Yasukichi. 1986. “Sandard of Living in Japan Before Industrialization: From
What Level Did Japan Begin? A Comment.” Journal of Economic History 46(1):
217–224.

Young, Arthur. 1792. Travels in France and Italy during the Years Iy8y, Iy88, & Iy89.

London: W. Richardson.

Zaccagnini, Carlo. 1988. “On Prices and Wages at Nuzi.” Altorientalische Forschungen

15(1): 45–52.

Zelin, Madelaine. 1986. “The Rights of Tenants in Mid-Qing Sichuan: A Study of
Land-Related Lawsuits in the Baxian Archives.” Journal of Asian Studies 45(3):
499–526.

R  R cs   407



Index

Page numbers followed by f indicate figures, those followed by n indicate notes, and those fol-
lowed by t indicate tables.


Africa: agriculture in, 350–51; death rates in,
58–59, 108; effects of AIDS in, 45–47; ex-
planations of poverty in, 13–14, 350–51; in-
comes in, 43–44, 323; life expectancies in,
366; male stature in, 55–56, 58; output per
person in, 325; population growth in, 366;
subsistence wage in, 366. See also Egypt

age declarations, 176–78, 177t

age heaping, 177–78, 178t

agrarian societies: cultural advantages of, 14;
differences from forager societies, 184–88;
income inequality in, 36; interest rates in,
170; life expectancies in, 92–93, 94t; life-
time output in, 187–88, 187f; living stan-
dards in, 37, 49; population densities in,
184; technological advance in, 185–86; work

hours in, 62–63, 65, 69. See also Neolithic
Revolution

agriculture: English output, 247–49, 249t;

farm acreage, 248, 250t; grain markets, 261,
261f; innovations in, 238, 286–87; inter-
national trade in, 247–49; output and
farmland prices, 158, 159f; preindustrial
methods, 366–67; productivity growth in,
193,  233, 238–39, 285; proportion of popula-

tion employed in, 54, 55, 193, 196; raw
materials production, 256; wheat yields,
238, 239f. See also farm laborers; farmland

AIDS, in sub-Saharan Africa, 45–47

animal economies, 32–33, 66

aristocracy: origins of, 162; reproductive suc-
cess of, 11, 122–23, 122t, 269–70

Asia: comparisons to England, 260–66; expla-
nations of absence of Industrial Revolution
in, 266–71; fertility rates in, 267–70; living
standards in, 69–70, 89–90; marriage pat-
terns  in, 75–76, 78; output per person in,

325. See also China; India; Japan

Australia: Aboriginals, 70, 142, 219; tariffs of,

315

Babylon, 10, 138, 170

Belgium: fertility rates in, 72, 75; interest rates
in, 175. See also Flanders

bequests: correlation between fathers and
sons, 119–20, 120f; to genetic relatives,
117–18, 118f; to poor, 117–18, 118f; relation-
ship between size of and number of chil-
dren, 87, 88f, 88t. See also wills

birth control. See contraception

birth rates: in Asia, 76–77, 77t, 78; associa-
tion with wealth, 87, 88f, 88t; decline in
and focus on human capital, 223–26;
definition of, 20; equal to death rates, 21,
22–23, 22f; illegitimate, 74, 82, 243; in-
comes and, 81f, 81–82, 84–89, 89f; increase

409


birth rates (continued )

in England, 243; in Malthusian equilib-
rium, 20; relationship to living standards,
20, 26; schedules, 26, 26f, 123–24, 123f.
See also fertility

Black Death: effects on life expectancies, 95,
101–2; effects on living standards, 99–102;

transmission of plague, 100, 101

Bombay (Mumbai): cotton textile industry
in, 318, 322, 346, 347t, 357, 358, 360, 361,

363–65; plague deaths in, 100; transport

costs to, 309

bonds, rates of return on, 329, 330f, 330–31,
331t

British Empire, 314, 315–16, 331
bubonic plague. See Black Death
building laborers: real wages of, 41, 41t,

276–77, 276f; skill premium for, 180–81,

180f, 225; work hours of, 63, 63t, 65

calories, 50t, 50–52, 284–85

capital: divergence and, 329–33, 335; efficiency
growth and, 204–7, 205f, 206f, 335; gains
from productivity improvements, 296–99;
as input to growth, 197–98, 200; as input
to production, 8, 24, 231–32, 355f, 355–57;

labor substitutions for, 356–57, 358–59;
output per worker and, 335, 335f; physical
stocks of, 202, 203t, 204–7, 275, 329;

in preindustrial societies, 167–68; share in
costs, 231–32. See also interest rates

capital, human. See human capital

capital goods: cost of, 333, 333f; English ex-
ports of, 313, 337, 338

capital markets, 331–33

Catholic Church: Inquisition, 145; views of
usury, 215–16, 217

children: as consumption item, 291–92; death
rates of, 294–95; employment of, 339; qual-
ity of, 223–24, 291–92. See also birth rates;
reproductive success

China: agriculture in, 25; cotton textile
industry in, 337–38, 358; differences from

England, 260–62; education in, 262, 266;

European involvement in, 314–15, 317; fe-

male infanticide in, 76, 77–78, 95, 110; fer-
tility rates in, 75, 76–77, 77t; grain markets
in, 261, 261f; hygiene standards in, 106; in-
dividualism in, 188; land rents in, 138; life

expectancies in, 95; literacy in, 265–66; liv-
ing standards in, 31–32, 69, 70; male
stature in, 58; market development in, 260;
marriage patterns in, 75–76, 78; migration
to frontier areas of, 267; population density
in, 141–42; population of, 31–32, 267, 267t;
Qing imperial lineage, 269–70, 270f; re-
productive success of elite in, 11, 269–70,
270f;   sex ratio in, 77, 78, 110; social mobil-
ity in, 162; tariffs of, 315; taxation as share
of national income, 154, 154t; technological
advance in, 133, 134; technological regres-

sion in, 143–44; wages in, 337–38

Christianity. See Catholic Church; Church of
England; Protestantism

Church of England: tithe collections, 153;
views of usury, 217

cities. See urban areas

cleanliness. See hygiene standards

coal: as energy source, 256, 285, 308, 338;
English output of, 236, 237f; European
reserves of, 260; prices of, 237, 237f, 338;
technological advance in industry, 236–37;
transport costs of, 309–11, 310f, 334, 334f

colonies, European, 104–5, 260, 305, 313–16.

See also British Empire

consumption: of calories, 50t, 50–52, 284–85;
children as goods, 291–92; of dairy prod-
ucts, 69–70; effects of rising incomes,
195–96; Engel’s Law and, 52–55; of food,

43, 50t, 50–52, 195–96; possibilities, 67; pro-
portion of income spent on food, 52–55; of
protein, 50t, 50–52; real purchasing power
and, 254–55, 255f; standard bundle of goods,
41–42, 42t; time preference in, 171–72; vari-
ety of diets, 51–52

contraception, 73, 74, 293. See also fertility
limitation

cotton textile industry: beneficiaries of innova-
tion in, 236; British managers and skilled
workers in other countries, 357–58; in
China, 337–38, 358; comparative costs in,
337–40, 338t, 340t; costs of mills, 333, 333f,
337,  338; female laborers in, 311, 339; gender
differences in wages, 278; in India, 346,
347t,   356, 357, 358–59, 360–65, 364t, 368t,

368–69; inefficiencies in poor countries, 337,

340–42, 346–49, 356; international trade,

315, 316t, 322; in Japan, 262, 311, 346; labor

40  x 


costs and wages in, 13, 340, 342f; labor disci-
pline in, 15, 362–65, 364t; labor intensity in,
353–54; labor productivity in, 13, 360–65;
management decisions, 357–59, 359t; man-
ual production, 319, 368–69; output per

worker, 342, 343f, 346, 347, 347t, 348f; pro-

ductivity growth in, 233–34, 296–97; profits

in, 203, 235–36, 296, 346, 347t, 358, 360; re-

turns on capital in, 296–97; ring spinning,

311–12, 313, 314t, 340–42, 343f, 355–56; tech-

nological advances in, 203, 233–36, 235t,

368–69; technological diffusion in, 296, 304,

313, 337, 338; transport costs in, 309, 310t;

unskilled laborers in, 311–12, 337, 340–42;

wages in, 337–38, 340, 342f, 353–54; work
hours in, 339, 340t

culture: influence on growth, 11; institutional
influences on, 208–9; lack of surplus for
producing, 55; middle-class values, 8, 11,

132, 166, 183–84, 185, 262; selective pressures

on, 10, 186

Darwin, Charles, 112, 186

death rates: of children, 294–95; definition of,
21; equal to birth rates, 21, 22–23, 22f; of
European military abroad, 108, 109t; in-
comes  and, 89f, 90, 96–99, 97f, 98f; of in-
fants, 92, 96–99, 98f; of pregnant women,
244–45, 245t, 295; in preindustrial societies,

6, 91–92; reductions in modern world,

44–45; relationship to living standards, 20,

99–102; in rural areas, 104; schedules,

26–27, 27f, 123–24, 123f; urban, 93, 104

debt. See bonds; interest rates; public debt
democracy, 219–20

demographics. See birth rates; death rates;

fertility; population

demographic transition, 8, 11, 225, 226f,

289–96, 290f

developing countries. See poor countries
Diamond, Jared, 13, 37, 187

disease: AIDS, 45–47; in cities, 93; death rates
from, 58–59; plague, 95, 99–102; White

Death, 110–11

division of labor, 367

economic growth. See growth

economic history of world, basic outline of,

1, 2f

education: in Asia, 262, 263, 266; returns on,
224–26. See also human capital; literacy
efficiency: of English economy, 232; estimates
of, 231–32, 380; output per worker and,

336, 336f; in poor countries, 336–51

efficiency growth: accelerating rates after

1800, 228, 231–34, 240; as cause of income

divergence, 334–36; in England, 232–33,
232f, 233t, 240–42, 240f, 241f; as input to
economic growth, 200–201, 202–3, 204–7;
measurement of, 135; population growth
and,  227–28, 227f; in preindustrial soci-
eties, 257–58; relationship to physical capi-
tal growth, 204–7, 205f, 206f; sources of,
232–33, 233t; wage increases and, 272–77

efficient institutions hypothesis, 212–13

Egypt, Roman: fertility rates in, 77t, 78–79;
infanticide in, 110; life expectancies in, 93;
numeracy in, 176; price stability in, 156–57;
returns on land rents in, 169; speed of in-
formation travel to, 305–6, 306t

endogenous growth theories, 210, 226–29

energy: human labor, 284–85; periods of, 370;
yields of labor, 67–69, 68t. See also coal

Engel curves, 53, 53f

Engel’s Law, 52–55

England: agriculture in, 25, 247–49; famines

in, 69; fertility rates in, 71, 72, 81–82, 243;

government expenditures in, 148, 149, 149f;
hygiene standards in, 106–8; inflation in,
156, 156t; living standards in, 38–39, 41;
male stature in, 58; manufactured exports
of, 246, 248, 337, 338; mortality sources in,

126–28, 127f, 128f; Poor Laws of, 31, 34, 41,

50–51; population density in, 141; popula-

tion growth in, 193, 194f, 243, 245–46,

247, 267, 267t; population in preindustrial
period, 29–30; public debt, 157, 158f; social
mobility in, 130–31, 131t, 160–62; subsis-
tence incomes in, 23; taxation in, 148–54;
technological advance in, 29–30, 30f,

136–40; urbanization in, 104; work hours
in, 63t, 63–65. See also British Empire; wills

Enlightenment, 209

Europe: coal reserves in, 260; fertility rates in,
72–75, 73t, 76t; hygiene standards in, 6,
102,  105; living standards in, 69–70, 89–90;
male stature in, 58, 60f, 60–62; marriage
patterns in, 71–72, 74–75, 76t, 81–84, 105;

x  4


Europe (continued )

population growth in, 20, 21t. See also

Black Death; colonies; France; Netherlands
evolution. See natural selection

exogenous growth theories, 209, 210–17

famines, 69

farm laborers: food expenditures of, 53–54,
54t; lifetime earnings of, 187f, 188; real
wages of, 41, 41t, 272; work hours of, 63, 65

farmland: output of, 25; prices relative to
output, 158, 159f; rents of, 274–75, 274f;
in United States, 249, 250t. See also agri-
culture

female infanticide, 76, 77–78, 95, 110

fertility: in Asia, 267–70; decline in modern
economies, 289–96, 290f; demographic
transition, 8, 11, 225, 226f, 289–96, 290f;

gross, 289–90, 291; Hutterite standard of,

72–73, 73t; by income group, 85–89,

267–70, 292–93, 292t, 293f; increase in

England, 243; within marriage, 72–73, 73t,

76t, 76–77, 77t, 78–79, 82, 87–89, 292–94,

292t; in modern forager societies, 79, 80t;
net, 290; relationship to life expectancies,
71; relationship to living standards, 71. See
also birth rates; reproductive success

fertility limitation: absence of conscious con-
trol, 73–74, 80, 82, 87–89; in Asia, 76–78;

with contraception, 73, 74, 293; in

England, 81; in Europe, 71–72, 73–74;
factors in, 74–75, 75f; in forager societies,
79; mechanisms of, 80–81; in preindustrial

societies, 5–6, 79

Flanders: farmland prices in, 158, 159f; returns
on landholding in, 175, 176f

food: composition of diets and income,

52–54, 54t; English imports of, 248, 249t;
famines, 69; influence on stature, 56; pro-
duction in preindustrial societies, 54–55;
proportion of income spent on, 52–55.

See also agriculture; consumption

forager societies: egalitarian consumption in,
36; energy yields of, 67–69, 68t; fertility
limitation in, 79; food consumption in, 50,
52–53; labor income in, 280; leisure time
in,  68; lifetime output in, 187–88, 187f; liv-
ing standards in, 68–69; work hours in, 65

forager societies, modern: calorie production
in, 68t; ethnographies of, 186; fertility rates

in, 79, 80t; food consumption in, 50t, 51;
life expectancies in, 92, 93t, 96; male
stature in, 59t, 59–60; mortality sources in,
124–25, 125t, 129; reproductive success in,
129, 130t; time preference rates in, 171–72;
work hours in, 64t, 65–66

France: agriculture in, 196; colonies of, 314;
fertility rates in, 72, 75, 78–79, 294; life
expectancies in, 92; per capita incomes
in,   321; population growth in, 243; social
mobility in, 162

French Revolution, 230

fundamental equation of growth, 197–204,
379–82

Galor, Oded, 8n, 167n, 210n, 228–29

garment manufacturing, 347–50, 349f, 350f.
See also cotton textile industry

Germany: colonies of, 314; per capita incomes
in, 195, 321; reproductive success of rich in,
132

Glorious Revolution, 148, 149, 241, 242

gold standard, 331

government bonds, rates of return on, 329,
330f. See also public debt

government expenditures, 148, 149–50, 149f,
150t

grain markets, 261, 261f

Great Divergence. See income divergence
Greece, ancient: interest rates in, 169; slavery

in, 221

gross reproduction rate (GRR), 289–90, 291

growth: alternation of energetic and slow
periods, 370; explanations of modern,
197–207; fundamental equation of,

197–204, 379–82; incentives and, 145–47;
Malthusian model and, 29–32; modern
rates   of, 200, 200t, 381–82; since 1800,
319–27; transition to modern rates of,
249–56, 257

GRR. See gross reproduction rate

guilds, 164, 218

happiness: relationship to income, 15–16,
374–77, 375f; relative to reference groups,
16, 376; surveys on, 374–75

Hawaii, 29, 143
health. See disease
heights. See stature

Hobbes, Thomas, 19–20

42  x 


homicide: infanticide, 76, 77–78, 95, 109–10;
in medieval England, 126, 127f, 160; in
modern forager societies, 124–25, 125t; in
modern societies, 160

human capital: increase in, 223–26; as input
to growth, 201–2; returns on education,
224–26; value of, 201–2, 201t

hunter-gatherer societies. See forager societies
Hutterite standard of fertility, 72–73, 73t
hygiene standards, 6, 102, 105, 106–8

illegitimacy rates, 74, 82, 243

immigration, 105, 303, 373
imperialism. See colonies, European
incentives: economic, 147; growth and,

145–47; in medieval England, 147, 148t; in
modern England, 148t

income divergence, 3, 12–15, 319–27; effi-
ciency growth and, 334–36; explanations
of, 13–15, 328–29, 352–53, 354–55, 372; in-

crease in, 365–69; low subsistence wages
and, 45; per capita incomes, 320–27, 321f;
role of labor quality, 352, 353–54. See also
poor countries; rich countries

income inequality: compared to wealth in-
equality, 279–80, 279t; decrease in, 11–12,

272–73, 299; effects of Industrial Revolu-

tion, 11–12, 278–83; in forager societies,

280; in preindustrial societies, 2, 36, 279.

See also income divergence

incomes: association with happiness, 15–16,
374–77, 375f; birth rates and, 81f, 81–82,
84–89, 89f; comparison of English and
Dutch, 247, 248f; consumption and,
195–96; death rates and, 89f, 90, 96–99,
97f, 98f; differences across countries,

320–27, 321f; increases since 1800, 2f, 2–3,

8, 195, 195f, 247, 248f; population growth
and, 1, 245–46, 246f; proportion spent on
food, 52–55; real, 193–94, 194f, 195f; real
national in 2000, 44, 46t; real purchasing
power of, 254–55, 255f; relationship to mar-
ginal tax rates, 152, 153f; subsistence, 22–23,
25, 136; variations across preindustrial soci-

eties, 91; world distribution of, 323–25,
325t. See also reproductive success, relation-
ship to income; wages

India: building technology in, 265; cotton
goods imported by, 315, 322; cotton textile
industry in, 346, 347t, 356, 357, 358–59,

360–65, 364t, 368t, 368–69; farm laborer
food expenditures in, 53, 54t; growth in,
370; imports and exports of, 322, 323t; in-
comes in, 44, 322–23, 324f; interest rates
in, 170; labor productivity in, 354, 356,

360–65; literacy in, 264–65; living stan-

dards in, 69, 264, 319; male stature in, 55,

57, 61; plague outbreaks in, 100; poverty

in, 325–27; railroad construction in, 313,

342–45; railway interest costs in, 330–31;
wages in, 264. See also Bombay

Industrial Revolution: effects on income in-
equality, 11–12, 278–83; English advantages

in, 10–11, 260–62; explanation of timing

of, 8–10, 208; major events of, 231–39; as

product of gradual evolution, 10, 208–9,

231; seen as sudden shock, 9, 231, 239,

242–49; timing of transition, 239–42

Industrial Revolution, theories of, 9, 208–10;

endogenous growth, 210, 226–29; exoge-

nous growth, 209, 210–17; institutionalism,

146–47, 210–17, 218–23, 224, 234, 238, 241;

multiple equilibrium, 209, 218–26

industrious revolution, 62–66

inequality: in life prospects, 283–84, 283t;
wealth, 279–80, 279t, 281–82, 281t. See also
income divergence; income inequality

infanticide, 76, 77–78, 95, 109–10

infant mortality rates, 92, 96–99, 98f

inflation, 154–57; in England, 156, 156t; in
preindustrial societies, 156–57; social costs
of, 155, 155f

inflation tax, 155–56

information, speed of travel, 305–7, 306t,
307t

innovation: demand and supply of, 224, 224f,
237–38; external benefits of, 203, 207; in
market economies, 185–86. See also techno-
logical advance

inorganic production systems, 256–57

institutionalism, 146–47, 210–17, 218–23, 224,

234, 238, 241

institutions: endogeneity of, 212–13, 226–28;
human behavior changed by stability of, 11,
167, 208–9; influence on growth, 10; intel-

lectual property rights, 163–64, 203, 237,

238; legal, 173–74; in medieval England,

147, 148t; personal security, 159–60; politi-
cal economy of, 218–20, 219f; in preindus-
trial societies, 145–47; price stability,

x  43


institutions (continued )

154–57; public debt, 157; security of prop-
erty, 158–59, 173, 174; taxation, 148–54. See
also markets

intellectual property rights, 163–64, 203, 237,

238

interest payments, religious prohibitions and
exceptions, 215–17

interest rates: decline in, 166, 168–69, 169f,
172–75, 275; default risk premium in, 173;
in early societies, 169–70; on government
bonds, 329, 330f; growth premium in,
172–73; in medieval Europe, 168–69, 170t,

173; nominal, 154, 168; real, 168, 172; return
on rent charges, 168, 169f, 174, 175t; in
United States, 332–33; usury laws and, 215–17

Ireland: agriculture in, 25; per capita incomes
in, 322, 370; population of, 246; potato
famine in, 257; real wages in, 246, 247f

iron and steel, 236–37, 256

Iron Law of Wages, 31

Islam, views of usury, 215, 216–17

Italy: age declarations in, 177; real wages in,
47, 47f, 103–4; urbanization in, 103–4. See
also Roman Empire

Japan: adoption frequency in, 268; agriculture
in, 25; birth rates in, 89, 89f; cotton textile
industry in, 262, 311, 346; differences from

England, 261; education levels in, 262, 263;
famines in, 69; farm laborer food expendi-
tures in, 53, 54t; female infanticide in, 110;
fertility rates in, 75, 76–77, 77t, 78; happi-
ness reported in, 16, 375, 375f; hygiene
standards in, 6, 105, 106, 107; incomes in,

16, 89, 89f, 375, 375f; interest rates in, 263;
life expectancies in, 95; literacy in, 263;
male stature in, 58, 61; marriage patterns
in, 76; population density in, 141; popula-
tion growth in, 267, 267t; reproductive
success of samurai, 11, 268, 269f; social
characteristics of, 262–63

knowledge: as asset, 202, 204; growth of and
population size, 227–28. See also intellec-
tual property rights; technological advance

Korea, return on land ownership in, 266. See
also Asia

Kremer, Michael, 226–28, 367

labor: energy yields of, 67–69, 68t; as input to
production, 24–25, 197–98, 231–32, 355f,

355–57; marginal product of, 24–25; pro-
ductivity differences, 352; productivity of,
67; quality differences across countries,
352, 353–54, 357, 359–65, 369, 370; relation-

ship to output, 24–25, 25f; share in costs,
231–32; as share of national income in
England, 280, 280f; substituting for capital,
356–57, 358–59. See also building laborers;
farm laborers; unskilled laborers; wages;
work hours

labor markets, 162–63, 285–89

land: as input to growth, 197–99; as input to
production, 24, 231–32; markets, 163; share
in costs, 231–32; titles, 173. See also farm-
land

Landes, David, 11

land rents: decline in, 198; of farmland,

274–75, 274f; returns on, 168, 169f, 173,

174–75, 175t, 176f, 266, 284–85; as share of

national income in England, 138, 138f, 198,
199f, 275, 280; urban, 198, 275

Law of Diminishing Returns, 24–25, 68

legal systems, 173–74, 214–15. See also intellec-
tual property rights

life expectancies: adult, 92, 94t, 94–95, 95t,

97, 98f, 101–2; at birth, 21, 92; income

differences and, 87, 97, 98f, 122, 283, 283t,

284; as inverse of death rate, 21, 27; in

medieval England, 95, 101–2, 122, 122t;
in modern forager societies, 92, 93t, 96;
in modern world, 44–47, 46t, 366; in
preindustrial societies, 1, 27, 91–96, 94t,
95t; relationship to fertility, 71; in urban
areas, 93–94

literacy: in Asia, 263, 264–66; increase in, 166,

175–76, 178–79, 179f, 183, 226; relationship

to wealth, 86, 184, 184f, 283, 283t, 284; re-

wards for, 180–81; of women, 295–96

living standards: comparisons of 1800 to early
societies, 19–20, 38–39, 40; comparisons of
Europe and East Asia, 69–70, 89–90; defi-
nition of, 21–22; divergence in, 319–20; ef-
fects of Black Death, 99–102; Engel’s Law
and, 52–55, 53f; increased work hours and,
66–69; in poor countries, 43t, 43–47; pop-
ulation growth and, 20; in preindustrial
societies, 1–2, 5, 90; relationship to birth

44  x 


rates, 20, 26; relationship to death rates,
20, 99–102; relationship to fertility, 71;
stature as indicator of, 55–62

London: death rates in, 93; fertility rates in,
162; as financial center, 331; grain trade in,
163; infant mortality rates in, 96–97; legal
system in, 173–74; migration to, 162, 163;
speed of information travel to, 306, 307t;
work hours in, 64

machine-building firms, 305, 312–13, 338

machinery question, 286–87

Malawi: effects of AIDS in, 45–47; male
stature in, 55–56, 56f; wages and prices in,
43t, 43–44

Malthus, Thomas Robert, 5, 31–33, 34, 58,

80–81, 89, 243; Essay on the Principle of

Population, 31, 33, 72, 75, 112

Malthusian equilibrium, 4–8, 20–25, 22f

Malthusian model: in animal economies,
32–33; assumptions of, 20–25, 22f; com-
parison of England and Asia, 267; eco-
nomic growth and, 29–32; variations in
wages and living standards, 47, 48;
“virtues” and “vices,” 36, 37t

Malthusian scissors, 123–24
management, quality of, 354–59
marginal product of labor, 24–25

markets: capital, 331–33; in China, 260; effi-
ciency and capital growth in, 204–7; goods,
163; grain, 261, 261f; innovations stimulated

by, 185–86; labor, 162–63, 285–89; in medi-

eval England, 147, 160–61, 162–63

marriage patterns: in Asia, 75–76, 78; changes
in, 243–45; economic factors in, 82–83; in
Europe, 71–72, 74–75, 76t, 81–84, 105;

fertility limited by, 74–75, 75f, 80–81;
men’s average ages, 76, 83, 244f; proportion
of never married women, 74, 105, 243;

women’s average ages, 74, 75, 76t, 81,

82–83, 243, 244f, 245t

Marx, Karl, 272, 353–54

material living standards. See living standards
mechanized factories, 311

men: ages at marriage, 76, 83, 244f; wages

compared to women’s wages, 277–78. See
also stature

Mexico: cotton textile industry in, 339; garment
manufacturing, 350; power costs in, 338

middle-class values, 8, 11, 132, 166, 183–84, 185,

262

military death rates, 108, 109t. See also wars
modern economies: demand for unskilled

labor, 285–89; life expectancies in, 44–47,
46t, 366; mortality sources in, 125–26; pro-
duction functions of, 206, 206f; simple
model  of, 197–204. See also growth; poor
countries; rich countries

Mokyr, Joel, 51n, 181n, 183n, 209

money, use of, 184. See also gold standard;
inflation

mortality: sources of, 124–28, 125t, 129,

159–60; war deaths, 126–28, 128f. See also

death rates; homicide

multiple equilibrium theories, 209, 218–26

Mumbai. See Bombay
murders. See homicide

nails, productivity growth and prices of,

252–53, 254f

Native Americans: exposure to European dis-
eases, 111; male stature of, 59

natural economy, 5, 19

natural selection, 6–8, 10, 112–13, 167, 186–87

Neolithic Revolution: effects on inequality,
280; effects on work hours, 65, 69; living
standards and, 37–38; population estimates,
139; social change after, 6–7, 186–87. See
also agrarian societies

Netherlands: colonies of, 104–5, 314; fertility
rates in, 102–3; growth in, 370; interest
rates  in, 175; male stature in, 55; marriage
patterns in, 105; per capita incomes in, 247,
248f, 321; real wages and population in,
102–3, 103f; real wages in, 47, 47f; sex ratio
in, 105; urbanization in, 104

net reproduction rate (NRR), 290
North, Douglass, 209, 212, 219, 242
NRR. See net reproduction rate

numeracy: age declarations and, 176–78, 177t;
in forager societies, 186; increase in, 166,
175–78; in Japan, 263; rewards for, 180–81;

vagueness of, 179–80

ocean transport, 307–9, 315–16

organic production systems, 256–57

organizational change, machine-building
firms, 305, 312–13, 338

x  45


Ottoman Empire: interest payments in, 217;
interest rates in, 170; taxation as share of
national income, 154, 154t

Pacific islands, 108, 217. See also Polynesia
patents, 202, 237, 238. See also intellectual

property rights

Pepys, Samuel, 4, 73–74, 105, 106, 182

personal security, 159–60

plague. See Black Death

Platt Brothers firm, 313–14, 342

Poland, agriculture in, 366–67

political economy: of institutions, 218–20,
219f; in Malthusian era, 33–35

poll taxes, 148–49, 163

Polynesia: death rates in, 62, 108; fertility
rates in, 109; infanticide in, 109–10; male
stature in, 62; value of metals in, 29. See
also Tahiti

Pomeranz, Kenneth, 69n, 260–62

poor countries: explanations of poverty in,
13–14, 350–51; labor costs in, 347–49; labor
quality in, 15, 359–65; life expectancies in,
45, 46t; living standards in, 43t, 43–47;
management quality in, 354–59; output per
worker  in, 325, 345–47, 350, 350f, 354, 355;

production inefficiencies in, 336–51; wages
in, 12, 43t, 43–44, 347–49, 349f. See also in-
come divergence

Poor Laws, 31, 34, 41, 50–51

population: densities of, 140–42, 141f, 184,

227–28; migration of, 105, 303, 373; station-

ary, 21, 23; world distribution of, 323–25, 325t

population growth: in Africa, 366; in Asia,

267, 267t; efficiency growth and, 227–28,

227f; in England, 193, 194f, 243, 245–46,

247, 267, 267t; global, 139, 139t; income

growth and, 1, 245–46, 246f; relationship

to living standards, 20; until 1800, 20; in
Western Europe, 20, 21t

poverty: effects of poor laws, 33–34; food con-
sumption and, 50–51. See also living stan-
dards; poor countries

pregnancy, deaths in, 244–45, 245t, 295

preindustrial societies. See agrarian societies;
forager societies; Malthusian model

prices: evidence of, 41; grain, 261, 261f; pro-

ductivity growth and, 252–53, 254f; stability
of, 154–57

printing industry, 250–52, 263

production functions: effects of technological
advance, 134–36, 136f; for England, 136–37,
137f; in modern economies, 206, 206f

production inputs, 8, 24–25, 197–98, 231–32,

355f, 355–57

productivity: in book production, 252, 253f;

in cotton textiles, 233–34, 296–97; human

capital investments and, 201–2; labor, 67;
measurement of, 135; in nail production,
252–53, 254f. See also efficiency

profits: in cotton textile industry, 203, 235–36,
296, 346, 347t, 358, 360; international com-
parisons of, 332; of railroads, 298, 299t

property: ownership of, 184–85; security of,
158–59, 173, 174; transfers of, 184–85. See
also land

property values. See land rents
Protestantism, 183. See also Church of

England

public debt, 157, 158f. See also government
bonds

railroads: capital goods exports, 313; construc-
tion of, 297, 298f, 307, 308t, 313, 342–45;

debentures, 330–31, 331t; locomotives, 342,

344f, 345; output per worker-hour, 343–45,
345f; productivity differences, 343–45, 345f,
346f; profits of, 298, 299t; returns on capi-
tal, 297–98, 299t; technological advance in,
236–37, 304

real wages. See wages, real

reproductive success: of aristocracy, 122–23,
122t; of Chinese imperial lineage, 11,
269–70, 270f; in earlier societies, 128–29,

130t; of Japanese samurai, 11, 268, 269f; of
literate men, 184, 185; urban-rural differ-
ences, 161–62. See also fertility

reproductive success, relationship to income,
113, 114f; comparison of modern and prein-
dustrial England, 283, 283t, 284; differences
between agrarian societies, 188; in England,
7–8, 113–23, 131–32, 132t, 292–93, 293f; evi-

dence in wills, 113–20; literacy and, 185;
social effects of, 11, 132, 167, 183–84, 185

Ricardo, David, 24, 31, 34, 274, 286

rich countries: capital growth in, 205, 205f;
efficiency growth in, 205, 205f; government
expenditures in, 149–50, 150t; per capita in-

46  x 


comes in, 321–22; public debt of, 157; work
hours and marginal tax rates in, 151–52,
152f. See also income divergence; modern
economies

Roman Empire: age declarations in, 178;
infanticide in, 110; life expectancies in,
94–95; speed of information travel in,
305–6, 306t. See also Egypt, Roman

rural populations: death rates of, 104; in
preindustrial societies, 54, 196; reproduc-
tive  success of, 161–62

samurai, reproductive success of, 11, 268, 269f

sanitation. See hygiene standards
Sassoon family, 316–18

Scientific Revolution, 183

security: personal, 159–60; of property,

158–59, 173, 174

selection pressures. See natural selection
serfdom, 220–23

shifting cultivation societies: calorie consump-
tion in, 51; calorie production in, 67, 68t;
ethnographies of modern, 186; leisure time
in,    68; mortality sources in, 124, 129; time
preference rates in, 171; work hours in, 64t

shipping. See transportation

skeletal remains: estimates of ages at death,
96; evidence of violent deaths, 125, 126f;
stature of, 57, 60f, 60–62, 61t

skill premium, 180–81, 180f, 225, 276–77

slavery, 220–23, 222f

Smith, Adam, 35, 145, 146

social mobility: downward, 7–8, 113, 130–31,
131t; in England, 130–31, 131t, 160–62; in
preindustrial societies, 162

Solow, Robert M., 198n

stature: income differences and, 283–84,

283t; as indicator of living standards, 55–62;
influence of diet and health, 56; living, 55–60,
57t, 59t; in modern forager societies, 59t,

59–60; in preindustrial societies, 1, 56–62, 57t;

skeletal evidence of, 57, 60f, 60–62, 61t

steamships, 307–9, 311

subsistence incomes, 22–23, 25, 136

subsistence wage, 45, 353, 366

Sumer, interest rates in, 170

survival of the richest. See reproductive suc-
cess, relationship to income

survival of types, differential, 112–13

Tahiti, 29, 60, 66, 108, 109. See also Polynesia

taxation: in England, 31, 148–54, 160; mar-

ginal rates of, 149, 150, 150t, 151–52, 152f,
153f; in modern economies, 149, 150t, 377;
poll taxes, 148–49, 163; share in all income,
154, 154t

technological advance: before 1800, 29–30,

30f; benefits to consumers, 236, 237,

246–47, 296–97; in cotton textile industry,

203, 233–36, 235t, 368–69; delayed effects
of, 250–52; effects of isolated, 28–29, 28f;
effects on unskilled labor, 285–89; in
England, 29–30, 30f, 136–40; in Industrial

Revolution, 31, 140, 237–38; in information
transmission, 306–7; lack of incentives in
Malthusian economies, 164–65; in market
economies, 185–86; measuring from con-
sumption, 254–55, 255f; measuring from
population, 136–40, 139t; mechanized fac-
tories,  311; in nineteenth century, 305–19;
population densities and, 140–42; in pre-
industrial societies, 5, 133–35, 136–40, 136f,

144, 249–56, 251t; rates of, 134–35, 140; in

transportation, 307–11

technological diffusion: of British innova-
tions, 303–5, 313; in cotton textiles, 296,

304, 313, 337, 338; inefficiency of labor use
as barrier to, 345–47; restrictions on, 303;
time lags in, 304t, 304–5

technology: definition of, 136n; inorganic
production systems, 256–57; regression,
142–44

technology schedule, 24–25, 28–29

telegraph, 307

tenants, royal, 121, 122

textiles. See cotton textile industry
time preference rates, 171–72

tithe collections, 153

trade: in cotton textiles, 315, 316t, 322; effects
of innovation, 185–86; English food im-
ports, 247–49, 249t; English manufactured
exports, 246, 248, 337, 338; international,

246, 248, 315, 322, 323t, 349–50; tariffs, 315.

See also transport costs

transportation: productivity growth in, 233;
steamships, 307–9, 311. See also railroads

transport costs: of coal, 309–11, 310f, 334,
334f; of cotton goods, 309, 310t; decline in,
307–11, 315–16, 334

x  47


United States: farm acreage in, 248, 250t; gar-
ment industry in, 349–50; housing in, 327;
human capital in, 201–2, 201t; interest rates
in, 332–33; male stature in, 55, 56; per
capita incomes in, 321

unskilled laborers: in cotton textile industry,

311–12, 337, 340–42; demand for, 285–89;

female, 277–78; gains from efficiency
growth, 272–77; gains from Industrial
Revolution, 11–12; wages of, 12, 23, 31,

47–48, 48t, 225, 272, 277–78; wages relative
to average incomes, 282–83, 282t

urban areas: death rates in, 93, 104; land rents
in, 198, 275; life expectancies in, 93–94;
populations of, 54; real wages in, 103–4,
104f; reproductive success in, 161–62. See
also Bombay; London

urbanization, 103–4, 104f, 163, 196

usury, 215–17

violence: deaths caused by, 124–25, 129; de-
cline in, 166, 182–83; judicial, 182–83;
threat of, 159–60; war deaths, 126–28, 128f.

See also homicide

wages: in cotton textile industry, 337–38, 340,
342f, 353–54; effects of new production
processes, 14–15, 366–69, 367f; of female
workers, 277–78; in garment manufactur-
ing, 347–49, 349f; Iron Law of, 31; mar-
ginal product of labor and, 24–25; in poor
countries, 12, 43t, 43–44, 347–49, 349f;
premium for physical strength, 277–78;
skill premium, 180–81, 180f, 225, 276–77;
standard bundle of goods purchased with,
41–42, 42t; subsistence, 45, 353, 366; of tex-
tile workers, 278; of unskilled laborers, 12,
23, 31, 47–48, 48t, 277–78, 282–83, 282t;

wheat-equivalent, 23, 47–49, 48t, 49t
wages, real: before 1200, 47–48, 48t; before
1800, 40–49, 47f, 49t, 264; of building
laborers, 41, 41t, 276–77, 276f; of farm

laborers, 41, 41t, 272; increase in, 272–73;

in Ireland, 246, 247f; national variations in,
47, 47f, 48, 49t; in Netherlands, 102–3,
103f; of unskilled workers, 48t, 272; in ur-
ban areas, 103–4, 104f

wars, deaths in, 126–28, 128f

wealth: birth rates and, 87, 88f, 88t; inequality
in, 279–80, 279t, 281–82, 281t; literacy rates
and, 86, 184, 184f, 283, 283t, 284; living
standards and, 3–4; relationship to life ex-
pectancies, 97, 98f. See also bequests; repro-
ductive success

White Death, 110–11

wills: ages at death of testators, 92, 178; evi-
dence of fertility by income group, 85–89,
88f, 88t; evidence of life expectancies, 97,
98f; evidence of reproductive success of
rich, 113–20; evidence of social mobility,
130–31, 131t; evidence of wealth inequality,
282; fraction of surviving children, 97, 99f;
number of grandchildren, 118–19, 119f;
number  of surviving children, 82, 115t, 120,
121, 121f; number of surviving children by
asset level, 115–17, 116f, 292–93, 293f; num-
ber of surviving sons, 161–62, 161f, 294,
295f; social ranks of testators, 86, 87t; son-
daughter ratio, 113–14, 115t; testators with
no surviving sons, 161–62. See also bequests

women: ages at marriage, 74, 75, 76t, 81,

82–83, 243, 244f, 245t; deaths in childbirth,
244–45, 245t, 295; increased social status of,
277–78, 295–96; literacy rates of, 295–96;

marriage patterns of, 74, 75, 76t, 81, 82–83;

never married, 74, 105, 243; textile workers,

311, 339; wages of, 277–78

workers. See building laborers; farm laborers;
labor; unskilled laborers; wages

work hours: effects of increases on living
standards, 66–69; in England, 63t, 63–65;

increase in, 62–66, 64t, 166, 181; in pre-
industrial societies, 64t, 65; relationship to
marginal tax rates, 151–52, 152f; in textile
mills, 339, 340t

Wrigley, E. A., 116, 131, 256

48  x 


Figure Credits

Figure 1.2 Courtesy Gustavo Politis

Figure 1.3 Courtesy Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, England
Figure 2.7 Courtesy Anthony Clark

Figure 3.2 Courtesy Jean Louis Venne

Figure 3.5 Courtesy Ron Miller, www.rontravel.com
Figure 6.8 Courtesy Musée de Millau, Millau, France
Figure 7.1 Courtesy Philip Greenspun

Figure 8.1 Private collection, New York; photograph Erich Lessing,
Art Resource, New York

Figure 8.3 Courtesy Anthony Clark

Figure 9.6 Courtesy the Science Museum of Minnesota
Figure 11.1 Courtesy Jürg Wittwer

Figure 11.3 © The New Yorker Collection 2005. Bruce Eric Kaplan
from cartoonbank.com. All rights reserved.

Figure 12.2 Courtesy Lancashire County Museum Service, Preston,
England

Figure 13.2 Courtesy Pratheep P S, www.Hampi.in

Figure 14.1 From the Illustrated London News, February 15, 1868; cour-
tesy Peter Higginbotham

Figure 14.5 Courtesy Chris Knittel
Figure 15.7 Courtesy Arun Ganesh
Figure 15.8 Courtesy Chris Knittel

49


Figure 16.7 From the papers of Carter D. Poland of Anniston, Al-
abama; courtesy Special Collections and Archives, Auburn Uni-
versity

Figure 16.10 (top) Photograph by Lindsay Buck, courtesy Stephen Buck

Figure 16.10 (bottom) Photograph by Kenneth O’Bryen Nichols,
courtesy Mike Nichols

420    GUR  c R t s

